# UPSC Prelims 2014 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

Consider the following statements:

‘Bijak’ is a composition of the teachings of Saint Dadu Dayal.
The Philosophy of PushtiMarg was propounded by Madhvacharya.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Bhakti and Sufi Movement

Statement 1 is incorrect: Bijak is the collection of ideas and teachings of  Kabir was an Indian mystic poet and saint who lived in the 15th century.
His verses may be found in the Sikhism’s holy book Guru Granth Sahib and his writings had an impact on the Bhakti movement in Hinduism. He was a disciple of Ramananda. He launched a strong campaign on the superficial religious rituals that Muslims and Hindus both observe.
According to Kabir, the individual who is following the path of righteousness, views all living things as his own, and is passively detached from worldly affairs is the one who is closest to the truth.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Vallabhacharya’s philosophy came to be known as Pushti Marga. Vallabhacharya was also known as ‘Achinitabhadra’. He was the first to promote Krishna Bhakti on the basis of Maha Bhagavata Purana. He founded the philosophy of Shuddhadvaita which believed in the absolute union. He prescribed Pushtimarg as the means for salvation (extreme devotion to God).**

---

### Question 2

In Medieval India, the designations ‘Mahattara’ and ‘Pattakila’ were used for

- (a) Military officers
- (b) Village headmen
- (c) Specialists in Vedic rituals
- (d) Chiefs of craft guilds
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Medieval Terminology/Keyword
Correct answer is Option (b):

Mahattara and pattakila were the village headmen. Pattalika is generally identified with the modern Patel, believed to be the king’s representative in the village.
Mahattara was a non-official and possibly a representative of the people.**

---

---

## Art Culture

### Question 1

Ibadat Khana at Fatehpur Sikri was:

- (a) The mosque for the use of Royal Family
- (b) Akbar’s private prayer chamber.
- (c) The hall in which Akbar held discussions with scholars of various religions.
- (d) The room in which the nobles belonging to different religions gathered to discuss religious affairs.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Mughal Architecture/Islamic Architecture
Option (c) is correct: Ibadat Khana was used for discussions with various spiritual leaders of different religious grounds and to conduct a discussion on teachings of various religious leaders. Also known as the Hall of prayer.
Ibadat Khana:

It was a meeting house built by Akbar at Fatehpur Sikri in 1575 AD.
The emperor increasingly indulged in intellectual pursuits and came in contact with ascetics and disciples of Sufi saint Khwaja Muinuddin Chishti.
He also expected to receive Mirza Suleiman of Badakhshan, a Sufi with a strong taste for theological discussions.
Hence, he resolved to construct a debating hall that could accommodate a large number of Muslim theologians.
The construction of the Ibadat Khana started in the early 1575 CE at Fatehpur Sikri (City of Victory) and was completed in 1576 CE.

NOTE: This was a simple question direct hit from Class 7th History NCERT (pg.55). NCERTs are important for prelims. Attaching a screenshot here to convey to you the importance of reading and revising sidebars, chars and image texts from NCERTs.**

---

### Question 2

With reference to the cultural history of India, the term ‘Panchayatan’ refers to:

- (a) An assembly of village elders
- (b) A religious sect
- (c) A style of temple construction
- (d) An administrative functionary
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Temple Architecture

Ardha mandapa
Mandapa
Maha mandapa
Antarala
Garba griha
Pradakshina
Transepts
Jagatl
Subsidiary shrines


                                                                                      Plan of Kandariya Mahadeva Temple
Correct answer is Option (c): 
Panchayatan Style:

Panchayatan is a style of temple construction.
The main shrine is surrounded by four subsidiary shrines.
The origin of the name is the Sanskrit words Pancha which mean five and ayatana means containing.
Dashavatara Vishnu Temple, Deogarh (in Lalitpur District, Uttar Pradesh) was built in the early sixth century CE.
That is, about a hundred years or so after the small temples we just learnt about in Sanchi and Udaygiri.
The main shrine of this temple is constructed on a rectangular plinth in the panchayatana architectural style, and four additional subsidiary shrines are located at each of the four corners making it a total number of five shrines, hence the name, panchayatana.

NOTE: This question was a direct hit from Fine Art NCERT. It is also mentioned in the glossary of the same NCERT. Temple architectural styles are always important from prelims perspective. There were repeated questions on circular temples, Nagara style, Dravida style, Vesara style and Panchayatana.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the Indian history of art and culture, consider the following pairs.

Famous works of sculpture
Site



1. A grand image of Buddha’s Mahaparinirvana with numerous celestial musicians above and the sorrowful figures of his followers below

 
 
Ajanta


2. A huge image of Varaha Avatar (boar incarnation) of Vishnu, as he rescues Goddess Earth from the deep and chaotic waters, sculpted on the rock
 
 
Mount Abu


3. “Arjuna’s Penance”/“Descent of Ganga” sculpted on the surface of huge boulders
 
Mamallapuram

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Ancient Architecture/Sculpture/ Ajanta Cave
Pair 1 is correct: The image of Mahaparinirvana of Buddha is in cave 26 of Ajanta caves in the Sahyadri range on Waghora river in Aurangabad, Maharashtra. They were built under the patronage of Vakataka rulers.
Pair 2 is incorrect: A huge image of the Varaha Avatar of Lord Vishnu, rescuing Goddess Earth from the deep and chaotic waters is in Udayagiri caves near Vidisha, Madhya Pradesh. They were built under the patronage of Gupta rulers around the 5th century AD. Pair 3 is correct: Arjuna’s penance/Descent of Ganga is the monolithic sculpture built under the reign of Pallava King Mahendravarman and is located in Mamallapuram (Mahabalipuram), Tamil Nadu. This site was also included in UNESCO World heritage sites.




NOTE: UPSC asked this question directly from Class 11 NCERT (An Introduction of Indian Art and Culture). Hence, it underlines the importance of reading NCERT. Also, it is advisable to read the newspaper and always be observant about various developments.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to the famous Sattriya dance, consider the following statements:

Sattriya is a combination of music, dance and drama.
It is a centuries-old living tradition of Vaishnavites of Assam.
It is based on classical Ragas and Talas of devotional songs composed by Tulsidas, Kabir and Mirabai.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Indian Classical Dances

Statement 1 is correct: This dance form is a combination of music, dance and drama. Sattriya dance tradition is governed by strictly laid down principles in respect of hasta mudras, footwork, aharyas, music etc.
Statement 2 is correct: The Sattriya dance form was introduced in the 15th century A.D by the great Vaishnava saint and reformer of Assam, Mahapurusha Sankaradeva as a powerful medium for the propagation of the Vaishnava faith.
Statement 3 is incorrect: It is based on the songs composed by Sankaradeva and Madhvadeva.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following pairs:

Garba : Gujarat
Mohiniattam : Odisha
Yakshagana : Karnataka

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Indian Folk or Local Dances/ Performing Arts
Pair 1 is correct: Garba is a famous dance form of Gujarat, performed in October to honour the Hindu Deity of Divinity, Goddess Durga. It is a sacred practice in Gujarat to perform this joyful folk dance on practically all important occasions.
Pair 2 is incorrect: Mohiniattam is a classical dance form of Kerala. It belongs to the Lasya type, which presents a more elegant, soft, and feminine manner of dancing, despite having roots in the ancient Sanskrit Hindu scripture on performing arts known as “Natya Shastra”. Pair 3 is correct: Yakshagana is a musical dance theatre form of Karnataka. The dance form includes players dressed in costumes with vivid colours and shapes, singing, drumming, and dancing, as well as players who interpret words with gestures.**

---

### Question 6

Which of the following kingdoms were associated with the life of the Buddha?

Avanti
Gandhara
Kosala
Magadha

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d) 3 and 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Buddhism
Option (d) is correct: Kosala and Magadha were the two kingdoms associated with the life of the Buddha.

Buddha travelled through the kingdoms of Kosala, Magadha, Vaishali and Vajji in order to preach his philosophy.
Avanti had no direct connection to Buddha’s life.
Gandhara received Buddhist influence during the time of Ashoka When the Mauryan empire expanded up to
As per various Pali texts, it is known that Prasenjit, king of Kosala was a contemporary of Buddha.




NOTE: Same question came in consecutive years i.e 2014 and 2015. Here comes the advantage of reading PYQs, bonus of 2+ marks !! Jainism and Buddhism are all-time favourite topics of UPSC, preparing them in details always reap rich dividends.**

---

### Question 7

In Medieval India, the designations ‘Mahattara’ and ‘Pattakila’ were used for

- (a) Military officers
- (b) Village headmen
- (c) Specialists in Vedic rituals
- (d) Chiefs of craft guilds
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Keywords from the Medieval India
Option (b) is correct: The designations ‘Mahattara’ and ‘Pattakila’ were used for village officers in medieval India.

Mahattara and pattakila were the village headmen.
Pattalika is generally identified with the modern Patel, believed to be the king’s representative in the village.
Mahattara was a non-official and possibly a representative of the people.**

---

### Question 8

Every year, a month-long ecologically important campaign/festival is held during which certain communities/tribes plant saplings of fruit-bearing trees. Which of the following are such communities/ tribes?

- (a) Bhutia and Lepcha
- (b) Gond and Korku
- (c) Irula and Toda
- (d) Sahariya and Agariya
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Tribal Culture
Option (b) is correct: The Gond and Korku tribes plant saplings of fruit-bearing trees during a month-long festival called “Bhooma” or “Bhoomi” in India. This festival is a part of their traditional ecological practices aimed at promoting the conservation of natural resources.

Gond and Korku tribes of Madhya Pradesh celebrate the festival of Hari Jiroti in Betul and Harda districts. It is a month-long festival of Greenery during which tribals plant saplings of fruit-bearing trees.
Bhutia and Lepcha– Indigenous tribes of Sikkim
Irula and Toda– Tribes found in Nilgiri hills in Tamil Nadu
Sahariya and Agariya– Mostly found in Madhya Pradesh.**

---

### Question 9

Chaitra, one of the national calendars based on the Saka Era, corresponds to which one of the following dates of the Gregorian calendar in a normal year of 365 days?

- (a) 22nd March (or 21st March)
- (b) 15th May (or 16th May)
- (c) 21st March (or 30th March)
- (d) 21st April (or 20th April)
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Basic Observation
Option (a) is correct: Chaitra, one of the national calendars based on the Saka Era, corresponds to 22nd March (or 21st March) of the Gregorian calendar in a normal year of 365 days.



Saka samvat
Gregorian calendar


Chaitra
March 21- April 20


Vaisakha
April 21- May 21


Jyestha
May 22- June 21


Ashadha
June 22- July 22


Shravana
July 23- August 22


Bhadra
August 22- September 22


Ashwin
September 22- October 22


Kartika
October 23- November 21


Agrahayana
November 22-December 21


Pausha
December 22- January 20


Magha
January 21- February 19


Phalguna
February 20- March 20/21







NOTE: Same question came in consecutive years i.e 2014 and 2015. Here comes the advantage of reading PYQs, bonus of 2+ marks !! Jainism and Buddhism are all-time favourite topics of UPSC, preparing them in details always reap rich dividends.**

---

Question10

With reference to Buddhist history, tradition and culture in India, consider the following pairs:

Famous Shrine
Location


1. Tabo monastery and temple complex
Spiti Valley


2. Lhotsava Lhakhang
Zanskar Valley


3. Alchi Temple Complex
Ladakh

Which of the above pairs given is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Famous Shrines in India
Pair 1 is correct: Tabo Monastery is located in Spiti valley, Himachal Pradesh.
Pair 2 is incorrect: Lhotsava Lhakhang temple is in Nako village in the Kinnaur region  of  Himachal  Pradesh.  Zanskar valley is in the Kargil district of Ladakh. It has been identified as one of the hundred most endangered heritage sites by the World Monuments Fund.
Pair 3 is correct: Alchi temple complex is situated in Alchi village of Leh district, Ladakh. It was constructed by Guru Rinchen Zangpo around the 10th century.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following statements:

‘Bijak’ is a composition of the teachings of Saint Dadu Dayal.
The Philosophy of PushtiMarg was propounded by Madhvacharya.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Bhakti Movement
Statement 1 is incorrect: Bijak is the collection of ideas and teachings of Kabir. He was a 15th-century Indian mystic poet and saint, whose writings influenced Hinduism is Bhakti movement and his verses are found in Sikhism’s scripture Guru Granth Sahib. He was a disciple of Ramananda. He began a strong campaign against the superficial religious rituals of both Muslims and Hindus.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Vallabhacharya’s philosophy came to be known as Pushti Marga. He was also known as ‘Achinitabhadra’. He was the first to advocate for Krishna Bhakti using the Maha Bhagavata Purana as a foundation. Kabir:

He was a 15th-century Indian mystic poet and saint, whose writings influenced Hinduism’s Bhakti movement and his verses are found in Sikhism’s scripture Guru Granth Sahib.
He was a disciple of Ramananda. He began a strong campaign against the superficial religious rituals of both Muslims and
According to Kabir, the individual who is following the path of righteousness, sees all living things as his own, and is passively detached from worldly affairs is the one who is closest to the truth.
Through the Kabir Panth (“Path of Kabir”), a religious group that claims him as its founder and is one of the Sant Mat sects, Kabir’s legacy continues on and is preserved by them.
He wrote- Sabad, Bijak, Doha, Holi, and Rekhtal. He propagated Ram Bhakti.

Vallabhacharya:

He was also known as ‘Achinitabhadra’.
He was the first to advocate for Krishna Bhakti using the Maha Bhagavata Purana as a foundation.
He founded the philosophy of Shuddhadvaita which believed in the absolute union.
He prescribed Pushtimarg as the means for salvation (extreme devotion to God).**

---

### Question 11

A community of people called Manganiyars is well- known for their

- (a) Martial arts in North-East India
- (b) Musical tradition in North-West
- (c) Classical vocal music in South
- (d) Pietra dura tradition in Central India
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Tribes
Option (b) is correct: The community of people called Manganiyars is well-known for their musical tradition in North-West India. They are a Muslim community of hereditary musicians who live in the desert regions of Rajasthan and parts of Pakistan.
Manganiyars:

Manganiyars are a Muslim community of North-West India. They, along with the Langham community, are known for their folk music.
They have been professional musicians for generations supported by wealthy landlords of the area.
Pietra Dura is the art of carving the stone from a general point of This is an Inlay technique. The words “Pietra dura” come from Italian, it means “hard stone”, but also “semi-precious stone”.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following languages:

Gujarati
Kannada
Telugu

Which of the above has/have been declared as ‘Classical Language/Languages’ by the Government?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Indian Languages
Option (c) is correct: Both Kannada and Telugu have been declared as ‘Classical Language/Languages’ by the Government.

Gujarati has not been declared as a classical language by the government of India.
There are six classical languages in our country- Tamil (declared in 2004), Sanskrit (2005), Kannada (2008), Telugu (2008), Malayalam (2013), Odia (2014).
All the classical languages are listed in the 8th schedule of our constitution.**

---

### Question 13

Which one of the following pairs does not form part of the six systems of Indian Philosophy?

- (a) Mimamsa and Vedanta
- (b) Nyaya and Vaisheshika
- (c) Lokayata and Kapalika
- (d) Sankhya and Yoga
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Indian School of Philosophy
Option (c) is correct: Lokayata and Kapalika are not part of these six Lokayata refers to the materialist school of thought that originated in ancient India, while Kapalika is a tantric sect that emerged in the medieval period.



School of Philosophy
Founder
Central Theme


 
Nyaya
 
Gautama Rishi
Nothing is acceptable unless it is in accordance with reason and experience. Nyaya is considered a technique of logical thinking.


 
Vaisheshika
 
Kannada Rishi
It is a form of atomism in natural philosophy. believes in the complete authority of Vedas.


 
Samkhya
 
Acharya Kapila
Everything, in reality, stems from Purusha (self, soul or mind) and Prakriti (matter, creative agency, energy)


 
Yoga
 
Rishi Patanjali
Yogic techniques control body, mind & sense organs, thus considered as a means of achieving freedom or mukti.


Purva Mimansha
Rishi Jamini
Emphasis on the power of yajnas and mantras.


 
 
Vedanta
(Uttara Mimansa)
Vyasa Advaita by Shankara Vishishtadvaita by Ramanuja Dvaita by Madhvacharya Dvaitadvaita by nimbarka Shuddhadvaita by Vallabhacharya
Monistic school of philosophy that believes the world is unreal and the only reality is Brahman**

---

### Question 14

The national motto of India, ‘Satyameva Jayate’ inscribed below the Emblem of India is taken from:

- (a) Katha Upanishad
- (b) Chandogya Upanishad
- (c) Aitareya Upanishad
- (d) Mundaka Upanishad
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Indian School of Philosophy Option (d) is correct: Satyameva Jayate means “Truth alone Triumphs”. It is taken from Mundaka Upanishad. Mundaka Upanishad is listed as no. 5 in the list of 108 Upanishads of Hinduism.

Satyameva Jayate means “Truth alone Triumphs”. It is taken from Mundaka Upanishad. Mundaka Upanishad is listed as no. 5 in the list of 108 Upanishads of
The Mundaka Upanishad is a collection of philosophical poems used to teach meditation and spiritual knowledge regarding the true nature of Brahma and the Self (Atman).
It is composed of the three main parts (Mundaka):


The first part expounds on the science of higher and lower knowledge.
The second part describes the true nature of the Self (Atman) and Brahman.
The third part further builds on the previous two parts and attempts to describe the state of knowing Brahman, which is one of bliss and fearlessness.**

---

### Question 15

With reference to India’s culture and tradition, what is ‘Kalaripayattu’?

- (a) It is an ancient Bhakti cult of Shaivism still prevalent in some parts of South India.
- (b) It is an ancient style bronze and brass work still found in the southern part of the Coromandel
- (c) It is an ancient form of dance-drama and a living tradition in the northern part of Malabar.
- (d) It is an ancient martial art and a living tradition in some parts of South India.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Indian Martial Art
Option (d) is correct: Kalaripayattu, which originated in present-day Kerala, is a form of Indian martial arts known as Kalari. It has a rich history and is considered to be the oldest surviving martial art in India.
Kalaripayattu:

It is a martial dance practised in Kerala/ South India.
The art also bases medical treatments upon concepts found in the ancient Indian medical text, the Ayurveda.
Practitioners of Kalaripayattu possess intricate knowledge of pressure points on the human body and healing techniques that incorporate the knowledge of Ayurveda and Yoga.
This is taught in accordance with the Indian guru-shishya system.
It differs from many other martial arts systems in the world in that weapon based techniques are taught first, and barehanded techniques are taught last.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

Which of the following are some important pollutants released by steel industry in India?

Oxides of sulphur
Oxide of nitrogen
Carbon monoxide
Carbon dioxide

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Industrial Pollution
Option (d) is the correct answer: All the above are major pollutants released by the steel industry in India.
The environmental impact of steel production:

Steel production has a number of impacts on the environment, including air emissions (CO, SOx, NOx, PM2), wastewater contaminants, hazardous wastes, and solid wastes.
The major environmental impacts of integrated steel mills are from coking and iron-making.

Emissions to Air:

Coke production is one of the major pollution sources from steel production.
Air emissions such as coke oven gas, naphthalene, ammonium compounds, crude light oil, sulfur and coke dust are released from coke ovens.

Emissions to water:

Water emissions come from the water used to cool coke after it has finished baking.
Quenching water becomes contaminated with coke breezes and other compounds.
While the volume of contaminated water can be great, quenching water is fairly easy to reuse. Most pollutants can be removed by filtration.

Waste:

Slag, the limestone and iron ore impurities collected at the top of the molten iron make up the largest portion of iron-making by-products.
Sulfur dioxide and hydrogen sulfide are volatized and captured in air emissions control equipment and the residual slag is sold to the construction industry.
While this is not a pollution prevention technique, solid waste does not reach**

---

### Question 2

There is some concern regarding the nanoparticles of some chemical elements that are used by the industry in the manufacture of various Why?

They can accumulate in the environment and contaminate water and soil.
They can enter the food chains.
They can trigger the production of free radicals.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Industrial Pollution
Use of Nanoparticles:

Nanoparticles are used in the manufacture of scratch proof eyeglasses, crack-resistant paints, anti-graffiti coatings for walls, transparent sunscreens, stain-repellent fabrics, and self-cleaning windows, and ceramic coatings for solar cells.
Additionally, stronger, lighter, cleaner, and more intelligent surfaces and systems can be created with nanoparticles.

Impact of Nanoparticles:

They concentrate in the environment and contaminate the land and water.
They enter into the food
They also trigger the production of free
Nanoparticles may cross cell
Nanoparticles can reach the blood and may reach other target sites such as the liver, heart, or blood cells and may cause damage to cells as they stay for a persistently long

Statement 1 is correct: A matter particle with a dimension ranging from 1 to one 100 nanometers (nm) is referred to as a nanoparticle. They can accumulate in the environment, contaminate water and soil.
Statement 2 is correct: They enter into the food chains.
Statement 3 is correct: They also trigger the production of free radicals.**

---

### Question 3

Brominated flame retardants are used in many household products like mattresses and upholstery. Why is there some concern about their use?

1. They are highly resistant to degradation in the environment.

2. They are able to accumulate in humans and animals.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: (c)
Sub-Theme: General Environment
Brominated Flame Retardants (BFRs):

Brominated flame retardants (BFRs) are mixtures of man-made chemicals that are added to a wide variety of products, including for industrial use, to make them less flammable.
They are used commonly in plastics, textiles and electrical/electronic equipment.

Concerns:

They don’t degrade easily in fact they are highly resistant to degradation in the
Some brominated flame retardants were identified as persistent, bio accumulative, and toxic to both humans and the environment and were suspected of causing neurobehavioral effects and endocrine

Statement 1 is correct: They don’t degrade easily in fact they are highly resistant to degradation in the environment.
Statement 2 is correct: Some brominated flame retardants were identified as persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic to both humans and the environment and were suspected of causing neurobehavioral effects and endocrine disruption.**

---

### Question 4

The scientific view is that the increase in global temperature should not exceed 2°C above the pre- industrial level. If the global temperature increases beyond 3°C above the pre-industrial level, what can be its possible impact/impacts on the world?

1. Terrestrial biosphere tends toward a net carbon source.

2. Widespread coral mortality will occur.

3. All the global wetlands will permanently disappear.

4. Cultivation of cereals will not be possible anywhere in the world.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Effects of Global Warming
Statement 1 is correct: If the global temperature increases beyond 3°C above the pre-industrial level, the terrestrial biosphere tends toward a net carbon source. Taiga and temperate forests act as an important carbon sink; these forests would turn into a carbon source.
Statement 2 is correct: As temperatures rise, mass coral bleaching events occur. If the temperature keeps on rising, widespread coral mortality will occur.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The temperate regions can still survive if the temperature increases. The temperate zones are where the widest seasonal changes occur. The vegetation can survive there.
Statement 4 is incorrect: The weather should be warm and moist during the early stage of the growth of cereals. Therefore, the cultivation of cereals would still be possible if the temperature rises.**

---

### Question 5

What are the significances of a practical approach to sugarcane production known as ‘Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative’?

Seed cost is very low in this compared to the conventional method of cultivation.
Drip irrigation can be practised very effectively in this.
There is no application of chemical/inorganic fertilizers at all in this.
The scope for intercropping is more in this compared to the conventional method of cultivation.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (c) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Sustainable Agriculture
Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative:
The Sustainable Sugar Initiative (SSI) was launched jointly by International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and by ICRISAT and World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Aims: Cultivating sugarcane mainly by changing the way the inputs and methods are used, such as less use of seeds ,less use of water, optimum utilization of fertilizers and land, aims at reducing the input cost.
Statement 1 is correct: It majorly aims at reduction of the input cost compared to the conventional method of cultivation. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
Statements 2 and 4 are correct: SSI provides ample scope for intercropping and the drip irrigation method.
Statement 3 is incorrect: There is an application of both Inorganic and organic fertilizers such as Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Potassium (NPK) fertilizers.




NOTE: here, the topic in question is the “Sustainable” Sugarcane Initiative (SSI). Statement 2 talks about Drip-irrigation which is sustainable irrigation practice, that complies and is in conformity with SSI. Statement 1 talks about low input cost which is also in confirmation of sustainable practices. However, statement 3 endorses that “there is no application of chemical/ inorganic fertilizers at all” which sounds extreme. So statement 3 can be eliminated to get the correct answer.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following international agreements:

The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
The World Heritage Convention

Which of the above has/have a bearing on biodiversity?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: International efforts to protect biodiversity/Laws and Legislations

All the three agreements have a bearing on biodiversity.
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
Adopted by the 31st session of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations on 3rd November 2001.
It is also known as the Seed Treaty. India is a signatory to the treaty.

Objectives:

Recognising Farmers’ Contribution
Access and Benefit Sharing
Sustainability

United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD):

Established in 1994.
It is the sole legally binding international agreement linking environment and development to sustainable land management.
Aim: Its 197 Parties aim, through partnerships, to implement the Convention and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The end goal is to protect land from overuse and drought, so it can continue to provide food, water and energy.
Only convention stemming from a direct recommendation of the Rio Conference’s Agenda 21.
It is called the Rio Convention along with its sister conventions:




United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD)



World Heritage Convention:

Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage by UNESCO
Primary mission: to identify and protect the world’s natural and cultural heritage considered to be of Outstanding Universal Value.
India is a signatory to the convention and has 40 world heritage sites, which include 32 cultural, 7 natural and one mixed property. It acknowledges how people interact with nature and the critical necessity to maintain their delicate equilibrium.

NOTE: Question on the same theme earlier has been asked in 2011 i.e provisions bearing on biodiversity. It is advisable to go through provisions of the Indian constitution bearing upon the environment and its conservation.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following statements regarding ‘Earth Hour’

It is an initiative of UNEP and UNESCO
It is a movement in which the participants switch off the lights for one hour on a certain day every year.
It is a movement to raise awareness about climate change and the need to save the planet.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: UNEP/ Major Programmes of the UNEP
Earth Hour:

Earth Hour is a global movement for environmental conservation, started by The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) in 2007.
It is a yearly occurrence that happens on the last Saturday in March. In more than 180 nations and territories, millions of people take part in it by turning down their lights.
Aim: It aims to call attention to global warming, loss of biodiversity, and climate
As a global solidarity, people turn off their lights for one hour during Earth Hour.

Significance: The urgent need to address global climate change is highlighted in this hour. Additionally, it raises public awareness of environmental issues.
Statement 1 is incorrect: Earth Hour is a global movement for environmental conservation, started by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) in 2007.
Statement 2 is correct: It is an annual event that takes place on the last Saturday of March. Millions of people in over 180 countries and territories participate in it by turning off their lights.
Statement 3 is correct: It showcases the need to take action on the pressing issue of global climate change. Further, it promotes awareness about environmental issues on a public platform.**

---

### Question 8

If a wetland of international importance is brought under the ‘Montreux Record’, what does it imply?

- (a) Changes in ecological character have occurred, are occurring or are likely to occur in the wetland as a result of human interference.
- (b) The country in which the wetland is located should enact a law to prohibit any human activity within five kilometres from the edge of the wetland.
- (c) The survival of the wetland depends on the cultural practices and traditions of certain communities living in its vicinity and therefore the cultural diversity therein should not be destroyed.
- (d) It is given the status of ‘World Heritage Site’
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Wetland Conservation
Option (a) is the correct answer: ‘Montreux Record’ is a register of wetlands on the List of Wetlands of International Importance where ecological character changes have occurred, are occurring, or are anticipated to occur due to technological advancements, pollution, or other human influence.
Wetlands:

The convention uses a broad definition that encompasses all marsh, fen, peatland, and water areas, whether they are man-made or natural, permanent or temporary, with static or flowing fresh, brackish, or salt water, including marine areas whose depth at low tide is less than six metres.
World Wetland Day – 2nd February
Presently, India stands first in South Asia and third in Asia in terms of number of designated sites.

Ramsar Convention:

It is an international agreement between nations aimed at “the conservation and sustainable use of wetlands.”
The Convention on Wetlands is another name for it. It is named after the Iranian city of Ramsar.
India signed in Ramsar, Iran, in 1971
It is the only international treaty that addresses a specific ecosystem (wetland.)

Ramsar Convention is not a regulatory regime.




NOTE: This is a straightforward question from Montreux Record under Ramsar Convention. Also, these are high yielding topics and to attempt this type of question aspirants are requested to go through all the National Parks/Wildlife Sanctuary/ Biosphere Reserve/Wetlands including their locations (map), and geographical features, important flora and fauna if any.**

---

### Question 9

With reference to a conservation organisation called ‘Wetlands International’, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. It is an intergovernmental organisation formed by the countries which are signatories to the Ramsar convention.

2. It works at the field level to develop and mobilise knowledge, and use the practical experience to advocate for better policies.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Wetland Conservations
Wetlands International:

It is a global organisation that works to sustain and restore wetlands and their resources for people and biodiversity.
It is an independent, not-for-profit, global organization, supported by government and NGO members from around the world.
Wetlands International’s work ranges from research and community-based field projects to advocacy and engagement with governments, corporate and international policy fora and
Wetlands International works through partnerships and is supported by contributions from an extensive specialist expert network and tens of thousands of volunteers.
It was founded in 1937 as the International Wildfowl Inquiry and the organization was focused on the protection of waterbirds. Later, the name became International Waterfowl & Wetlands Research Bureau (IWRB).
The scope became wider; besides waterbirds, the organization was also working on the protection of wetland areas.
Later, organizations with similar objectives emerged in Asia and the Americas: the Asian Wetland Bureau (AWB) (initiated as INTERWADER in 1983) and Wetlands for the Americas (WA) (initiated in 1989). In 1991, the three organizations started to work closely together.
In 1995, the working relationship developed into the global organization Wetlands International.

Statement 1 is incorrect: Wetlands International is an independent, not-for-profit, global organization, supported by government and NGO members from around the world.
Statement 2 is correct: Wetlands International does work at the field level to develop and mobilise knowledge and use the practical experience to advocate for better policies.




NOTE: These are high yielding topics and to attempt this type of question aspirants are requested to go through all the National Parks/Wildlife Sanctuary/Biosphere Reserve/ Wetlands including their locations (map), geographical features, important flora and fauna if any.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following pairs:

Wetlands                        Confluence of Rivers

Harike Wetlands: Confluence of Beas and Satluj/ Sutlej
Keoladeo Ghana National Park: Confluence of Banas and Chambal
Kolleru Lake: Confluence of Musi and Krishna

Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Wetland Conservation/Map Based
Harike Wetland

Harike Wetland also is the largest wetland in northern India on the border of Tarn Taran Sahib district and Ferozepur district of Punjab.
The wetland and the lake were formed by constructing the headworks across the Sutlej River in 1953, located downstream of the confluence of the Beas and Sutlej rivers just south of Harike village.

Keoladeo National Park

The Keoladeo National Park or Keoladeo Ghana National Park is formerly known as the Bharatpur Bird Sanctuary is in the Bharatpur District of Rajasthan.
It is situated at the confluence of the Gambhira and the Banganga rivers.

Kolleru Lake

It is the largest freshwater lake in Andhra Pradesh, India
It is located between Krishna and Godavari deltas.
It spans two districts of Andhra Pradesh-Krishna and West Godavari.

Pair 1 is correct: The Harike Wetland is located downstream of the confluence of the Beas and Sutlej rivers just south of Harike village.
Pair 2 is incorrect: The Keoladeo National Park is situated at the confluence of the Gambhira and the Banganga rivers.
Pair 3 is incorrect: Kolleru Lake is located between Krishna and Godavari deltas.**

---

### Question 11

With reference to ‘Global Environment Facility’, which of the following statements is/are correct?

- (a) It serves as a financial mechanism for ‘Convention on Biological Diversity’ and ‘United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change’.
- (b) It undertakes scientific research on environmental issues at global level.
- (c) It is an agency under OECD to facilitate the transfer of technology and funds to underdeveloped countries with specific aims to protect their environment.
- (d) Both (a) and (b)
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Climate Change Organization/ Global Environmental Facility
Option (a) is the correct answer: The GEF serves as financial mechanism for the following Conventions:

Stockholm
UN-FCCC
UN-CBD
UN-CCD
Montreal Protocol
Minamata Convention
GEF

GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY (GEF)

GEF was established on the eve of the 1992 Rio Earth Summit to help tackle environmental issues.
Located in: Washington C., United States
Parties:
The GEF is jointly operated by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), World Bank, & United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following statements:

1. Animal Welfare Board of India was established under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

2. The National Tiger Conservation Authority is a statutory body.

3. The National Ganga River Basin Authority is chaired by the Prime Minister.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Environmental Organizations and Institutions in India.
Statement 1 is incorrect: Animal Welfare Board of India was established in 1962 under Section 4 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
Statement 2 is correct: National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) is a statutory body under the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change.
Statement 3 is correct: The National Ganga Council (Earlier National Ganga River Basin Authority) is chaired by the Prime Minister. The National Ganga Council was established in accordance with the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The National Ganga River Basin Authority was replaced (NGRBA). It is in charge of overseeing the restoration of the River Ganga Basin, including Ganga and its tributaries, and the prevention of pollution.
Animal Welfare Board of India

It is a statutory body advisory in nature on Animal Welfare Laws and promotes animal welfare in the country.
Founded in 1962 in accordance with Section 4 of the 1960 Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act.
Under leadership of Rukmini Devi Arundale, the Animal Welfare Board of India was established, who was a well-known Bharatnatyam dancer and humanitarian Rukmini Devi Arundale.
The 28 members of the Board each have a three-year term.
Grants are given to organisations that endeavour to ensure that the nation’s animal welfare rules are observed.

National Tiger Conservation Authority

National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) is a statutory organisation created under the Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change.
The Tiger Task Force’s proposals led to its establishment in 2005.
It was established in accordance with the authorities and duties given to it by the Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972, as modified, under the enabling provisions of that Act.**

---

### Question 13

With reference to Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS), consider the following statements:

It is an autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
It strives to conserve nature through action-based research, education and public awareness.
It organises and conducts nature trails and camps for the general public.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Major Conservation Organizations
Statement 1 is incorrect: BNHS is one of the largest non-governmental organisations in India engaged in conservation and biodiversity research.
Statement 2 is correct: It supports many research efforts through grants and publishes the Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society. It has been classified as a “Scientific and Industrial Research Organization” by the Department of Science and Technology.
Statement 3 is correct: It organises and conducts nature trails and camps for the general public.
BNHS

BNHS is one of the biggest non- governmental groups working on biodiversity and conservation.
It was established on September 15, 1883, and has its headquarters in Mumbai’s Hornbill House.
It funds numerous research projects, and it also puts out the Bombay Natural History Society Journal.
For the general public, it plans and runs environmental hikes and camps.
It has been classified as a “Scientific and Industrial Research Organization” by the Department of Science and Technology.
The great hornbill serves as the BNHS’s
The Internet of Birds platform, created by IT consulting company Accenture and the Bombay Natural History Society, uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools like machine learning and computer vision to identify bird species found in India from digital photographs that are uploaded.**

---

### Question 14

With reference to ‘Eco-Sensitive Zones’, which of the following statements is/are correct?

Eco-Sensitive Zones are the areas that are declared under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
The purpose of the declaration of Eco-Sensitive Zones is to prohibit all kinds of human activities in those zones except agriculture.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Eco-Sensitive Zones
Statement 1 is incorrect: ESZs are notified by MoEFCC, Government of India under Environment Protection Act 1986.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The basic aim is to regulate certain activities around National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries so as to minimise the negative impacts of such activities on the fragile ecosystem encompassing the protected areas.
Activities in ESZs:



 
 
 
 
Prohibited activities

Commercial mining, sawmills, industries that pollute the environment (air, water, soil, noise, etc.), the construction of large hydroelectric projects (HEP), the use of wood for commercial purposes, tourism-related activities like hot-air balloon flights over national parks, the discharge of effluents or any solid waste, or the manufacture of hazardous materials.



 
 
Regulated activities

Tree cutting, the construction of hotels and resorts, the exploitation of natural water for commercial purposes, the installation of electricity lines, a radical transformation of agriculture, such as the use of heavy machinery, pesticides, etc., and road widening.



 
Permitted activities

The ongoing horticultural or agricultural techniques, the use of renewable energy sources, organic farming, rainwater harvesting, and the implementation of green technology across all sectors.**

---

### Question 15

The most important strategy for the conservation of biodiversity together with traditional human life is the establishment of:

- (a) Biosphere reserves
- (b) Botanical gardens
- (c) National parks
- (d) Wildlife sanctuaries
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: National Parks/Tiger Reserve/ Biosphere Reserve/Wildlife Sanctuary/Wetland
Option (a) is the correct answer: Biosphere reserves are legally protected regions where people and the environment can coexist while honouring each other’s needs. These areas might be terrestrial, coastal, or a combination of both. They are recognised under UNESCO’s MAB programme and nominated and established by the relevant nations. Hence, the most important strategy for the conservation of biodiversity together with traditional human life is the establishment of Biosphere Reserve.
Zonation Of Biosphere Reserve:



Core Areas

The central portions of biosphere reserves are strictly protected zones, which are frequently publicly owned lands that are subject to legal protection, such as a previously established national park, wilderness area, or wildlife refuge. The  core  region,  however,  could  be privately held or be a part of non- governmental groups.



Buffer Zones

Facilities for education,  training, tourism, and recreation may be located nearby the core area(s). In many biosphere reserves, the buffer zone  is  viewed  as  a  region  where scientific study is conducted and human use is less intense than what might be found in the transition zone.



Transition Areas

The  most     remote area      where   a society  supports  socioculturally  and environmentally sound  economic  and human activity.




 



NOTE: This is again a high yielding topic w.r.t. Environment and Ecology. To solve this type of question, aspirants need to have a clear concept regarding various conservation efforts. Hence, it is advisable that aspirants should read and understand this topic thoroughly.**

---

### Question 16

With reference to Neem tree, consider the following statements:

1. Neem oil can be used as a pesticide to control the proliferation of some species of insects and mites.

2. Neem seeds are used in the manufacture of biofuels and hospital detergents.

3. Neem oil has applications in the pharmaceutical industry.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c          
Sub-Theme: Tree Species

Neem Tree

Scientific Name: Azadirachta indica
Commonly known as neem, nimtree or Indian lilac.
It is a tree in the mahogany family Meliaceae.
It is native to the Indian subcontinent and most of the countries in Africa.
Neem is typically grown in tropical and subtropical regions. Neem trees also grow on islands in southern Iran. Its fruits and seeds are the sources of neem oil.


Importance of Neem Tree:

Neem trees are cultivated and utilized as multipurpose trees. Nearly all parts of the neem tree are useful.
In many areas, neem is considered a weed and based on its antimicrobial resistance and other antifungal properties, they are also used in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries.



Statement 1 is correct: Neem oil and neem barks are used as an insect repellent.
Statement 2 is incorrect: No such relevant and strong reference has been found.
Statement 3 is correct: Neem oil has multiple applications in the pharmaceutical industry.**

---

### Question 17

. Other than poaching, what are the possible reasons for the decline in the population of Ganges River Dolphins?

1. Construction of dams and barrages on rivers

2. An increase in the population of crocodiles in rivers

3. Getting trapped in fishing nets accidentally

4. Use of synthetic fertilisers and other agricultural chemicals in crop-fields in the vicinity of rivers.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Marine Species
Statement 1 is correct: Gangetic dolphins live in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna and Karnaphuli-Sangu river systems of Nepal, India, and Bangladesh. The Ganges river dolphin can only live in freshwater. They are essentially blind. They are also called ‘susu’. Construction of dams and other irrigation-related projects make them susceptible to inbreeding and more vulnerable to other threats because they cannot move to new areas.
Statement 2 is incorrect: An increase in the population of crocodiles in rivers is not a threat to Gangetic dolphins.
Statement 3 is correct: Dolphins die as a result of accidentally being caught in fishing nets, also known as bycatch.
Statement 4 is correct: Industrial, agricultural, and human pollution is another serious cause of habitat degradation.**

---

### Question 18

If you walk through countryside, you are likely to see some birds stalking alongside the cattle to seize the insects disturbed by their movement through grasses.

Which one of the following is/are such bird/birds?

Painted Stork
Common Myna
Black-necked Crane

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Species(Avifauna)
Common Myna

It is an opportunistic insect feeder that is disturbed by grazing cattle.
It is an omnivorous open woodland bird with a strong sense of territorial instinct.
It has adapted extremely well to the urban

Statement 1 is incorrect: Painted storks forage in flocks in shallow waters along rivers or lakes. IUCN Red List: Near Threatened
Statement 2 is correct: Common Myna is an opportunistic feeder on insects, disturbed by grazing cattle.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The habitat of Black- necked Crane is in the high altitude wetlands of the Tibetan plateau, Sichuan (China), and eastern Ladakh (India). Therefore, it is highly unlikely it can be seen in the countryside. IUCN Red List: Near Threatened.**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

The seasonal reversal of winds is the typical characteristic of

- (a) Equatorial climate
- (b) Mediterranean climate
- (c) Monsoon climate
- (d) All of the above climates
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Biomes/World Climate The Monsoon Climate (Am):

The monsoon climate is a type of weather where it rains a lot.



It’s found in India, South-east Africa, Northern Australia, the Guinea Coast of West Africa and the Pacific Coast of Columbia.
The seasonal reversal of wind along with alternating intervals of rainfall and drought define the monsoon climate.
Due to variances in yearly temperature fluctuations between continents and oceans, the monsoonal circulation system with reversal of wind direction emerges.(c) Sub-Theme: Biomes/World Climate The Monsoon Climate (Am):**

---

### Question 2

Which of the following phenomena might have influenced the evolution of organisms?

Continental drift
Glacial cycles

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Evolution vs Glacial cycle
Factors that might have influenced the Evolution of Organisms:

Continental Drift: The evolution must have been influenced by the movement of some animals due to continental drift, while others must have become stranded in one location. The distinctive primates found in Australia and South America are among the most notable examples of how continental drift affected creature evolution.
Glacial Cycles: The evolution of species may have been impacted by the increase in sea level brought on by glacial melt.
The final stages of evolution of Genus Homo occurs in the last 3 glacial cycles.**

---

### Question 3

In India, the problem of soil erosion is associated with which of the following?

Terrace cultivation
Deforestation
Tropical climate

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
 Sub-Theme: Soil degradation

Soil erosion is the process by which soil is displaced and transported from one location to another by natural forces such as wind or water. It is a natural process that occurs over time, but human activities such as deforestation, overgrazing, and construction can accelerate the process, leading to significant environmental damage.

Statement 1 is incorrect: Terracing is the practice of creating nearly level areas in a hillside area. protected from erosion by other soil barriers.
Statement 2 is correct: Deforestation is one of the major reasons for soil erosion. It includes cutting and felling of trees, removal of forest litter. Browsing and trampling by livestock, forest fires, also leads to deforestation, etc.
Statement 3 is incorrect: In the tropical monsoon climate people are mainly engaged in agriculture. Crops growing: rice, wheat, pulses, cotton, jute, sugarcane, oilseeds, coffee, tea and various types of fruits and vegetables.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following pairs:

Region
Well-known for the production of


1. Kinnaur
Areca nut


2. Mewat
Mango


3. Coromandel
Soya bean

Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: d
 Sub-Theme: Famous crop and places
Pair 1 is incorrectly matched: Kinnaur is mostly famous for apples. The production of Areca nuts is mostly confined to Karnataka, Kerala and Assam.
Pair 2 is incorrectly matched: The main occupation of Mewat is agriculture along with allied and agro-based activities, it is not famous for mango. Major mango-growing states are Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka,
Pair 3 is incorrectly matched: In the Coromandel Coast, major cultivations are Rice, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, peanuts, etc. Production of soybean in India is dominated by Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh which contribute 89 percent of the total production.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following towns of India:

Bhadrachalam
Chanderi
Kancheepuram
Karnal

Which of the above are famous for the production of traditional sarees/fabric?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) 1, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Traditional Saree/fabric
Option 1 and 4 are incorrect: Bhadrachalam and Karnal are not famous for the production of traditional sarees/fabric.
Option 2 and 3 are correct: Chanderi sarees is a traditional sari made in Chanderi, Madhya Pradesh, India. Kanjeevaram is a traditional sari from Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu, India, that is usually handwoven in mulberry silk and has pure gold or silver zari that renders it a festive quality.**

---

### Question 6

If you travel through the Himalayas, you are likely to see which of the following plants are naturally growing there?

Oak
Rhododendron
Sandalwood

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Natural Vegetation of India
Statement 1 is correct: Evergreen broad-leaf trees, such as oaks and chestnuts, belong to wet temperate types of forests (1000 and 2000 metres).
Statement 2 is correct: Coniferous trees like Rhododendron, pine, deodar, silver fir, spruce and cedar, are found in the temperate forests (1500 and 3000 metres).
Statement 3 is incorrect: Sandalwoods are found in tropical moist deciduous forests or monsoon forests which are found in western ghats, Deccan plateau, northern plains.




NOTE: This is straight from Class 9 Geography NCERT Chapter 5. This underlines the importance of reading NCERTs both for UPSC Pre and Mains perspective.**

---

### Question 7

With reference to ‘Changpa’ community of India, consider the following statements:

They live mainly in the State of Uttarakhand
They rear the Pashmina goats that yield fine wool
They are kept in the category of Scheduled tribes.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Tribe of India
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Changpa are a semi-nomadic people, they are mainly found in the Changtang, a high plateau that stretches across the cold desert of Ladakh.
Statement 2 is correct: They are raised for ultra- fine cashmere wool, also known as pashmina once woven.
Statement 3 is correct: In 1989, Changpas were declared as the Scheduled Tribes.**

---

### Question 8

Which of the following have coral reefs?

Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Gulf of Kachchh
Gulf of Mannar
Sunderbans

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 4 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Coral Reef
Coral reefs are underwater ecosystems formed by colonies of tiny animals called coral polyps. These animals secrete a hard, calcium carbonate exoskeleton that provides a foundation for the growth of other corals and a diverse array of marine organisms. Coral reefs are found in tropical and subtropical waters around the world, particularly in the Pacific Ocean, the Indian Ocean, and the Caribbean Sea.
Statement 1, 2 and 3 are correct: Coral reefs in India are found in a lot of areas including the Gulf of Kutch, Gulf of Mannar, Palk Bay, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Sundarban is the largest deltaic region of the world and encompasses over hundreds of islands (105), with a maze of innumerable rivers, rivulets, and creeks but does not have any coral reef.**

---

### Question 9

Consider the following pairs:

National Highway
Cities Connected


1. NH4
Chennai and Hyderabad


2. NH6
Mumbai and Kolkata


3. NH15
Ahmedabad and Jodhpur

Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched ?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: National Highway/Map based



National Highway
Cities Connected
Length (km)


NH 4
Mayabunder to Port Blair- Chidiyatapu (Andaman)
230


NH 6
Jorabat (Meghalaya) – Selling (Mizoram)
1873


NH 15
Baihat (Assam) – Wakro (Arunachal Pradesh)
664**

---

### Question 10

Which one of the following pairs of islands is separated from each other by the ‘Ten Degree Channel’?

- (a) Andman and Nicobar
- (b) Nicobar and Sumatra
- (c) Maldives and Lakshadweep
- (d) Sumatra and Java
Explanation


**Ans: a       
 Sub-Theme: Andaman Map based
The 10 degree channel is a water body that separates Andaman in the North and Nicobar in the South. Both the Andaman Islands and Nicobar Islands together form the Indian Union Territory (UT) of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Additional Information:

Nine Degree Channel separates the island of Minicoy from the main Lakshadweep
Eight Degree Channel separates the islands of Minicoy and Maldives.
Hudson strait separates the Gulf of Hudson & Atlantic Ocean.
Palk Strait separates Palk Bay & the Bay of
Duncan Passage separates Rutland Island (part of Great Andaman) and Little

 
 
Question 11
Consider the following pairs:
1. Dampa Tiger Reserve : Mizoram
2. Gumti Wildlife Sanctuary : Sikkim
3. Saramati Peak : Nagaland
Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3

	 
       Explanation
     
     
      
        
      
    
	
Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Major places of States
Statement 1 is correct: The Dampa tiger reserve is located in Mizoram. It is located in the Lushai Hills and spans an area of around 500 km2 at an altitude of 800-1,100 m. It is a component of Project Tiger and was designated a tiger reserve in 1994.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Gumti Wildlife Sanctuary is a Wildlife Sanctuary in Tripura. This sanctuary is the place for many animals like elephants, sambar, buffalo, yapping deer, wild goats and numerous more. The sanctuary has become a haven for reptiles as well.
Statement 3 is correct: Saramati peak rising above the surrounding peaks at the mountainous border of Nagaland state, India. It is one of the ultra-prominent peaks of Southeast Asia. It forms a natural boundary between India and Myanmar.**

---

### Question 11

Consider the following rivers:

Barak
Lohit
Subansiri

Which of the above flows/flow through Arunachal Pradesh?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Brahmaputra and its tributary
Statement 1 is incorrect: Barak river is one of the major rivers of South Assam. The 564 km long river is part of the Surma-Meghna River System. It rises in the Manipur Hills in northern Manipur state, India, where it is called the Barak. The Barak River flows through the states of Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram, and Assam in India and into the Bay of Bengal.
Statement 2 is correct: Lohit River is a tributary of the Brahmaputra River. It flows into Arunachal Pradesh after starting from eastern Tibet’s Zayal Chu range.
Statement 3 is correct: Both the Tibetan Autonomous Region of China and the Indian states of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh are traversed by the Subansiri River. It is the biggest tributary of River Brahmaputra.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following pairs:

Hills
Region


1. Cardamom Hills
Coromandel Coast


2. Kaimur Hills
Konkan Coast


3. Mahadeo Hills
Central India


4. Mikir Hills
North-East India

Which of the above pairs are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 and 3
- (c) 3 and 4
- (d) 2 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Physiography of India/Map based
Pair 1 is incorrect: Cardamom Hills are located in Kerala and south-west Tamil Nadu. It is situated on India’s southwest coast, whereas, the Coromandel coast is located in Tamil Nadu’s eastern coastal plain

Pair 2 is incorrect: Kaimur Hills is in the eastern portion of the Vindhya Range, present in Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.

Pair 3 is correct: Mahadeo Hills are located in the northern part of the Satpura Range in Madhya Pradesh state of central India.
Pair 4 is correct: Mikir Hills can be found in Assam, south of Kaziranga National Park. It is a region of the Karbi- Plateau in northeastern India. The highest mountain in the Mikir Hills is Dambuchko.**

---

### Question 13

Turkey is located between:

- (a) Black Sea and Caspian Sea
- (b)  Black Sea and Mediterranean Sea
- (c) Gulf of Suez and Mediterranean Sea
- (d) Gulf of Aqaba and Dead Sea
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: World Map
Option (b) is correct: Turkey is located between Black Sea and Mediterranean Sea.
About Geographic Boundary of Turkey:
Turkey is bordered on its northern side by the Black Sea, on its northeast by Georgia and Armenia, on its east by Azerbaijan and Iran, on its southeast by Iraq and Syria, on its southwest and western edges by the Mediterranean Sea and the Aegean Sea, and on its northwest by Greece and Bulgaria.**

---

### Question 14

What is the correct sequence of occurrences of the following cities in South-East Asia as one proceeds from south to north?

Bangkok
Hanoi
Jakarta
Singapore

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 4-2-1-3
- (b) 3-2-4-1
- (c) 3-4-1-2
- (d) 4-3-2-1
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Major cities/capital cities
The correct sequence of cities in South-East Asia as one proceeds from south to north would be Jakarta > Singapore > Bangkok > Hanoi.**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

The main objective of the 12th Five-Year Plan is:

- (a) Inclusive growth and poverty growth.
- (b) Inclusive and sustainable growth.
- (c) Sustainable and inclusive growth to reduce unemployment.
- (d) Faster, sustainable and more inclusive growth.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Economic Planning
Twelfth FYP (2012-2017):
The Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017) was launched with the objective of faster, sustainable, and more inclusive growth. It was the last five-year plan. Its growth rate target was 8%. Later, the government dissolved the Planning Commission with the NITI Aayog. Twelfth Five-Year Plan objectives:

To remove gender and social gaps in school
To enhance access to higher
To reduce malnutrition among children aged 0–3 years.
To provide electricity to all
Create 50 million new job opportunities in non-agricultural sectors.**

---

### Question 2

What does venture capital mean ?

- (a) A short-term capital provided to industries
- (b) A long-term start-up capital provided to new entrepreneurs
- (c) Funds provided to industries at times of incurring losses.
- (d) Funds provided for replacement and renovation of industries
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Business Funding
Option (b) is correct: Venture capital (VC) is a form of private equity and a type of financing that investors provide to startup companies and small businesses that are believed to have long-term growth potential.
Venture Capital:

Venture capital (VC) is a form of private equity and a type of financing that investors provide to startup companies and small businesses that are believed to have long- term growth potential.
The majority of venture capital is often provided by wealthy individuals, investment banks, and other financial organisations. However, it is not always in the form of money; it can also come in the form of managerial or technological know-how.
Venture capital is often given to startups with outstanding growth potential or to businesses that have had rapid growth and seem well-positioned to keep growing.
The possibility of above-average profits is an alluring payout, even though it might be risky for investors who put up money.
Venture capital is gradually becoming a popular—even necessary—source for obtaining funds for new businesses or projects with a brief working history (under two years), especially if they do not have access to capital markets, bank loans, or other debt instruments.
The main downside is that the investors usually get equity in the company, and, thus, a say in company decisions.**

---

### Question 3

The terms ‘Marginal Standing Facility Rate’ and ‘Net Demand and Time Liabilities’, sometimes appearing in news, are used in relation to:

- (a) Banking operations
- (b) Communications networking
- (c) Military strategies
- (d) Supply and demand of agricultural products
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Banking functions
Marginal standing facility (MSF) is a window for banks to borrow from the Reserve Bank of India in an emergency when interbank liquidity dries up completely.
The difference between a bank’s total demand and time liabilities (deposits) of a bank and its deposits in the form of assets held by another bank is represented by the term “Net Demand and Time Liabilities”.**

---

### Question 4

What is/are the facility/facilities the beneficiaries can get from the services of Business Correspondent (Bank Saathi) in branchless areas?

It enables the beneficiaries to draw their subsidies and social security benefits in their villages.
It enables the beneficiaries in the rural areas to make deposits and withdrawals.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2 only
- (d) Neither 1 nor 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Banking Functions
Statement 1 is correct: The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) launched the Business Correspondent (BC) Model in 2006 to improve financial inclusion in India. It enables government subsidies and social security benefits to be directly credited to the accounts of the beneficiaries, enabling them to draw the money from the bank saathi or business correspondents in their village itself.
Statement 2 is correct: Banks facilities are essentially brought to the communities via the BC model in their village. They can deposit and withdraw money from their account.**

---

### Question 5

In the context of the Indian economy, which of the following is/are the purpose/purposes of ‘Statutory Reserve Requirements’?

1. To enable the Central Bank to control the amount of advances the banks can create.

2. To make the people’s deposits with banks safe and liquid.

3. To prevent the commercial banks from making excessive profits.

4. To force the banks to have sufficient vault cash to meet their day-to-day requirements.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Banking Mechanism/Functions
Statement 1 is correct: When the central bank wants to increase the money supply in the economy, it lowers the reserve ratio. Hence it enables the Central Bank to control the amount of advances the banks can create.
Statement 2 is incorrect: RBI does not requires commercial banks to keep reserves in order to ensure that banks have sufficient assets to draw on when account holders want to be paid. It aims to make banks invest in G-Secs.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Reserve requirements are designed as “precautionary measures” to control the economy and not to stop banks from making “excessive” profit.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Statutory Reserve Requirements are not to force the banks to have sufficient cash to meet their day-to-day requirements.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to the Union Budget, which of the following is/are covered under Non-Plan Expenditure?

Defence expenditure
Interest payments
Salaries and pensions
Subsidies

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 2, 3 and 4
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: c         
Sub-Theme: Public Finance
Non-plan Expenditure is largely the revenue expenditure of the government, although it also includes capital expenditure. It covers all expenditure not included in the Plan Expenditure. The majority of non- plan expenses include interest payments, pensions, and statutory transfers to state and union territory governments, interests and debt servicing costs, defence costs, and subsidies. Non-Plan Expenditure constitutes the biggest proportion of the government’s total expenditure. Both revenue and capital expenses are incurred for defence services.**

---

### Question 7

With reference to Balance of Payments, which of the following constitutes/constitute the Current Account?

Balance of trade
Foreign assets
Balance of invisibles
Special Drawing Rights

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 1, 2 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c         
Sub-Theme: BoP
The balance of payment (BoP) is a record of all monetary transactions made between the residents of one country and the rest of the world. A balance of payments deficit means the nation imports more than it exports. The current account and capital account are the two components that constitute the balance of payments. The current account comprises balance of trade (exports-imports), net remittances, transfers of money as well as transactions in commodities and services (Invisibles). The capital account includes Foreign Direct Investment, Foreign Portfolio Investment, External Commercial Borrowings, SDR. The capital account records all international purchases and sales of assets such as money, stocks, bonds, etc.**

---

### Question 8

Which of the following organisations brings out the publication known as ‘World Economic Outlook’?

- (a) The International Monetary Fund
- (b) The United Nations Development Programme
- (c) The World Economic Forum
- (d) The World Bank
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: IMF Reports

The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a report by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that analyses key parts of the IMF’s surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries. The World Economic Outlook (WEO) presents the IMF’s analysis and projections of global economic developments and classifies their analysis by region and stage of economic development. The World Economic Outlook database is created during the bi-annual WEO exercise, which begins in January and June of each year and results in the April and September/October WEO publication. It is usually prepared twice a year and is used in meetings of the International Monetary and Financial Committee.
Other Report published by IMF:

Global Financial Stability Report**

---

### Question 9

If the interest rate is decreased in an economy, it will:

- (a) Decrease the consumption expenditure in the economy.
- (b) Increase the tax collection of the government.
- (c) Increase the investment expenditure in the  economy.
- (d) Increase the total savings in the economy.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Money and Banking
Relationship between  investment  and interest rates: The investment curve of the economy serves as another example of expenditure. A decrease in interest rates results in an increase in investment spending. Hence, if the interest rate is decreased in an economy, it will increase the investment expenditure in the economy. Decreased interest rates would ensure the availability of capital for investment expenditure.**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

Which one of the following Schedules of the Constitution of India contains provisions regarding anti-defection?

- (a) Second Schedule
- (b) Fifth Schedule
- (c) Eighth Schedule
- (d) Tenth Schedule
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Articles and Schedules of Indian Constitution
Tenth Schedule:

It deals  with  the  provisions  as  to disqualification on grounds of defection.
In 1985, the 52nd Amendment Act added the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.
On the basis of a petition by any other member of the House, it lays out the procedure by which a legislator may be removed from office on the grounds of defection by the Presiding officer of a legislature.
The Chairman or Speaker of that House is tasked with making the final determination regarding disqualification due to defection.
Both the Parliament and state legislatures are subject to the statute.
The Presiding Officer’s decision is not subject to judicial review, according to the original law.
This condition was struck down by the Supreme Court in Kihoto Hollohan judgement (1992), thereby allowing appeals against the Presiding Officer’s decision in the High Court and Supreme Court. Judicial review is a basic feature of the constitution.**

---

### Question 2

In the Constitution of India, promotion of international peace and security is included in the

- (a) Preamble to the constitution
- (b) Directive Principles of State Policy
- (c) Fundamental Duties
- (d) Ninth Schedule
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Liberal-Intellectual Principles
The Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) are mentioned under Articles 36 to 51 of the Indian Constitution. The DPSPs have been borrowed from the Constitution of Ireland. Article 51 is clear in dealing with the international peace and security and for achieving the same it directs the State to focus on:

Maintaining just and honourable relations with the nations.
Foster respect for international law and treaty obligations.
Encourage settlement  of international disputes by arbitration.**

---

### Question 3

Consider the following statements – A Constitutional Government is one which:

1.  Places effective restrictions on individual liberty in the interest of State Authority.

2. Places effective restrictions on the Authority of the State in the interest of individual liberty.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Constitutional Government
The Constitutional Government is defined by the existence of a constitution. The idea behind constitutionalism is to place restrictions on the authority of the state so that it does not become autocratic. Thus, the Constitutional Government places restrictions on the Authority of the State to protect the interest of individual liberty (Example: Fundamental Rights).**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following statements:

1. The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.

2. All executive actions of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Prime Minister.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Powers of President
Statement 1 is correct: India follows a Parliamentary type of Government in which the President is the constitutional head of the state. He is the Executive head of India. Article 77(3) of the Indian Constitution says that the President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Article 77(1) of the Indian Constitution lays down all executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following statements regarding a No- Confidence Motion in India:

1. There is no mention of a No-Confidence Motion in the Constitution of India.

2. A motion of No-Confidence can be introduced in the Lok Sabha only.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: No-Confidence Motion
Statement 1 is correct: The Constitution of India does not mention about either a Confidence or a No Confidence Motion. A motion of “No Confidence Motion” against the Government can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha under rule 198. If the motion is accepted, then the party in power has to prove its majority in the House. The member need not give a reason for moving the no-confidence motion.
Statement 2 is correct: The party can remain in power when it shows its strength through a floor test which is primarily taken to know whether the executive enjoys the confidence of the legislature. If any member of the House feels that the government in power does not have a majority then he/she can move a no- confidence motion. A government can function only when it has majority support in the Lok Sabha.
Additional Information:



No confidence Motion
Censure Motion


•   Art. 75: Council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. This principle is the bedrock of parliamentary democracy.
•   Not mentioned in the Constitution, is moved under
Rule 198 of rules of procedure and can be moved only in Lok Sabha.
•   Ministry stays in office till they enjoy confidence of the majority of the members of the Lok Sabha
•   Needs support of 50 members, no need to state the reasons for its adoption.
Moved only against the entire CoM (Not against individual/
group of ministers) and if passed, the CoM must
resign from office.
•   Moved to seek the disapproval of certain policies of the government.
•   Need to state the
reasons for its adoption.
•   Can be moved against an individual minister or
a group of ministers or the entire council of ministers.
If it is passed in the Lok Sabha, the CoM need not resign from the office but the government to seek the confidence
of the house immediately.**

---

### Question 6

Which one of the following is the largest Committee of the Parliament?

- (a) The Committee on Public Accounts
- (b) The committee on Estimates
- (c) The Committee on Public Undertakings
- (d) The committee on Petitions
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Parliamentary Committees
The Estimates Committee was set up in 1950, on the recommendation of John Mathai. It consists of 30 members, all from the Lok Sabha and it is the largest committee. The minister cannot be the members of the estimates committee. Its function is to examine the budget and also suggest economies of public expenditure. It also suggests an alternative policy of bringing policy of economies.
Additional Information: Parliamentary Committee

The Constitution of India mentions these committees at different places, but without making any specific provisions regarding their composition, tenure, functions, etc. as it has been dealt in detail in the rules of two
Public Accounts Committee
Origin: set up first in 1921 under Govt. of India Act 1919
Composition: 22 (15 Lok Sabha + 7 Rajya Sabha) Elected for one year – proportional representation by single transferable vote. The Chairman – from Opposition Minister cannot be a member.
Function: To examine CAG Audit report and discover the irregularities

Committee on Public Undertakings

Origin: set up on the recommendations of Krishna Menon Committee 1964
Composition: 22 (15 Lok Sabha + 7 Rajya Sabha) Elected for one year – proportional representation by single transferable vote. The Chairman – the opposition minister cannot be a member.
Function: To examine reports and accounts of public sector Don’t involve day to day affairs of PSU.
The Committee on Petitions
Origin: It owes its origin to a resolution moved by a member in the then Council of State on 15 September 1921.
Composition: 25 members (15 from Lok Sabha + 10 from Rajya Sabha) Nominated by Speaker/Chairman as the case may be.
Function: To estimate every petition referred to it and if the petition complies with the rules to direct that it be circulated**

---

### Question 7

Which of the following is/are the function/functions of the Cabinet Secretariat?

1. Preparation of agenda for Cabinet Meetings

2. Secretariat assistance to Cabinet Committees

3. Allocation of financial resources to the Ministries

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Executive Functions

Statement 1 is correct: A cabinet secretary is appointed for a fixed period of time, usually two years. The All India Services (Death-Cum- Retirement-Benefits) Rules, 1958 state that the government may extend a cabinet secretary’s tenure as long as the overall length of service does not exceed four years. A Cabinet Secretary holds the responsibility of preparation of agenda for Cabinet Meetings.
Statement 2 is correct: The prime minister has direct control over the cabinet secretariat. The cabinet secretary, who serves as the ex- officio chairman of the civil services board, is the administrative head of the secretariat. It also gives secretary assistance to the Cabinet Committees.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Secretariat facilitates government decision-making by providing interministerial coordination. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure is entrusted with the allocation of financial resources to the Ministries.**

---

### Question 8

The power of the Supreme Court of India to decide disputes between the Centre and the States falls under its:

- (a) advisory jurisdiction
- (b) appellate jurisdiction
- (c) original jurisdiction
- (d) writ jurisdiction
Explanation


**Ans: c          
 Sub-Theme: Jurisdiction and Powers of Supreme Court
According to Article 131, a dispute between two or more states comes under the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. Other disputes which comes under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court are:

State and other states
Centre and state on one side and other state on other side
Original jurisdiction of the SC extends to any dispute between the GoI and one or more states**

---

### Question 9

The power to increase the number of judges in the Supreme Court of India is vested in

- (a) The President of India
- (b) the Parliament
- (c) The Chief Justice of India
- (d) the Law Commission
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Constitutional Provisions Pertaining to Supreme Court

Article 124(1) mandates that there shall be a Supreme Court of India constituting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
The power to increase the number of judges in the SC is vested in the Parliament.
In the Indian Constitution, Parliament is authorised to regulate judges.
In the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2019, the number of judges in the SC was increased by 3 judges. As a result, there are now 34 judges in total, including the Chief Justice, as opposed to 31**

---

### Question 10

Which of the following are the discretionary powers given to the Governor of a State?

1. Sending a report to the President of India for imposing the President’s rule

2. Appointing the Ministers

3. Reserving certain bills passed by the State Legislature for consideration of the President of India

4. Making the rules to conduct the business of the State Government

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Discretionary Power of Governor
Statement 1 is correct: Under Article 356, President’s Rule is imposed if the President, upon receipt of the report from the Governor of the State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. This comes under the discretionary power of the Governor.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Article 164 (1) states that the Chief Minister and the other Ministers on the advice of the Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor.
Statement 3 is correct: As per Article 200 the Governor of a state can use his legislative power to reserve the bill for the consideration of the President.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Making the rules to conduct the business of the State Government does not come under Governor’s discretionary power. In the Nabam Rebia judgement (2016), the Supreme Court held that the exercise of Governor’s discretion under Article 163 is limited and his choice of action should not be arbitrary or fanciful.**

---

### Question 11

The sales tax you pay while purchasing a toothpaste is a

- (a) Tax imposed by the Central Government
- (b) Tax imposed by the central Government but collected by the State Government.
- (c) Tax imposed by the State Government but collected by the Central Government.
- (d) Tax imposed and collected by the State
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Financial Relations b/w Centre and State

Earlier taxes on toothpaste used to come under CST Act, which is administered by the State Government.
The payment of sales Tax was made to the Sales Tax Authority in the state from where the goods are moved.
Now the sales taxes on toothpaste comes under GST.





Distribution of Tax Revenues



Article
Levy
Collection
Appropriation
Various Taxes


268
Centre
State
State
Stamp duties on shares, cheques, promissory notes, insurance etc.


269
Centre
Centre
State
Taxes on interstate trade and commerce. Revenues do not form part of the consolidated fund of India.


270
Centre
Centre
Shared between Centre and states
All taxes in the union list –income tax (other than agricultural income), corporate tax, etc.


271
Centre
Centre
Centre
Surcharge on taxes under Art 268,269,270.


 
N.A.
 
State
 
State
 
State
Sales tax, excise duty on liquor and Narcotics, octroi, professional tax (max of Rs 2500 – limit kept by constitution)


Article
Levy
Collection
Appropriation
Various Taxes**

---

### Question 12

Which of the following are associated with ‘Planning’ in India?

1. The Finance Commission

2. The National Development Council

3. The Union Ministry of Rural Development

4. The Union Ministry of Urban Development

5. The Parliament

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 2 and 5 only
- (b) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: c         
Sub-Theme: NDC / Planning Commission / NITI Ayog

Statement 1 is incorrect: It is constituted by the President under Article 280 to give its recommendations on the distribution of tax revenues between the Union and the States. It defines the financial relations between the Centre and the States.
Statement 2 is correct: Earlier, NDC served as “the highest decision-making authority” in the country on development matters. NDC used to advise the Planning Commission on planning. Statement 3 is incorrect: The Union Ministry of Rural Development is entrusted with the task of accelerating the socio-economic development of rural India.
Statement 4 is incorrect: The Union Ministry of Urban Development is entrusted with the formulation and administration of the rules and regulations and laws relating to the housing and urban development in India.
Statement 5 is correct: Parliament is the supreme legislative institution of the Republic of India. It is directly responsible to make laws for the welfare of the society.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

What was/were the object/objects of Queen Victoria’s Proclamation (1858)?

To disclaim any intention to annex the Indian States
To place the Indian administration under the British Crown.
To regulate East India Company’s trade with India

Select the correct answer using the code given

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Administrative Reforms post 1857/ Queen’s Proclamation
Queen Victoria’s Proclamation (1858):

The proclamation was read out by Lord Canning at a durbar held on November 1, 1858 at Allahabad. It put an end to the rule of the East India Company and the government of India came directly under the Crown.
According to the proclamation Lord Canning became the first viceroy and governor general of India.
The proclamation put an end to the era of further expansion of the British Empire in India.

Government 0f India Act (1858)

It was known as the “Act of Good Government of India”.
According to its provisions, Her Majesty’s government would now be in charge of India and would do so in her name.
It abolished the East India Company and transferred powers to the Crown.

Statement 1 is correct: The proclamation was read out by Lord Canning at a durbar held on November 1, 1858 at Allahabad. It put an end to the rule of the East India Company and the government of India came directly under the Crown. According to the proclamation Lord Canning became the first viceroy and governor general of India. The proclamation put an end to the era of further expansion of the British Empire in India.
Statement 2 is correct: Queen Victoria’s proclamation of 1858 aimed at ending the rule of the company and transferring all the powers to the British crown after the 1857 revolt. It also promised non- interference in the religious affairs of the people, grant of equal protection of law and respect for ancient rights and customs of the people.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Queen Victoria’s Proclamation (1858) is aimed at improving the administrative machinery of supervision and control over the Indian government.**

---

### Question 2

The Partition of Bengal made by Lord Curzon in 1905 lasted until:

- (a) The First World War when Indian troops were needed by the British and the partition was ended.
- (b) King George V abrogated Curzon’s Act as the Royal Durbar in Delhi in 1911
- (c) Gandhiji launched his Civil Disobedience movement.
- (d) The Partition of India in 1947 when East Bengal became East Pakistan.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Partition of Bengal
Partition of Bengal (1905):

The decision to divide Bengal was made public by the British Government in 1903 and partition came into force in October 1905.
Reasons given by British- Bengal are too big to be administered and this division of Bengal into eastern and western Bengal would develop Assam.
Moderates started anti partition campaigns:
Leaders: Surendranath Banerjee, K Mitra and Prithwishchandra Ray
Newspaper: Hitabadi, Sanjibani,
The Partition of Bengal was annulled during the visit of the Royal Majesties, George V and Queen Mary to India. Partition of Bengal was annulled mainly to curb the rising revolutionary extremism/terrorism. This action disappointed the Muslim political King George V announced the abrogation in the Delhi Durbar on 11th December, 1911. King George V abrogated Curzon’s Act as the Royal Durbar in Delhi in 1911.**

---

### Question 3

The Ghadr (Ghadar) was a:

- (a) revolutionary association of Indians with headquarters at San Francisco.
- (b) nationalist organisation operating from Singpore.
- (c) militant organisation with headquarters at Berlin
- (d) Communist movement for India’s freedom with head-quarters at Tashkent.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Revolutionary Activities Abroad
About the Ghadar:

The Ghadar Party was a revolutionary organisation centred on the weekly newspaper “The Ghadar,” which had branches in the Far East and along the US coast in addition to its San Francisco 
Ramdas Puri, D. Kumar, Taraknath Das, Sohan Singh Bhakna, and Lala Hardayal, who arrived there in 1911, were involved in pre-Ghadar revolutionary activities.
The Ghadar programme aimed to organise official assassinations, disseminate anti- imperialist and revolutionary literature, coordinate with Indian troops stationed abroad, get weapons, and spark a simultaneous uprising across all British colonies
The Ghadar Party’s inspirational forces were Lala Hardayal, Ramchandra, Bhagwan Singh, Kartar Singh Saraba, Barkatullah, and Bhai Parmanand.
The Ghadarites intended to bring about a revolt in Their plans were encouraged by two events in 1914, the Komagata Maru incident and the outbreak of the First World War.**

---

### Question 4

The 1929 Session of Indian National Congress is on significance in the history of the Freedom Movement because the:

- (a) attainment of Self-Government was declared as the objective of the Congress.
- (b) Attainment of Poorna Swaraj was adopted as the goal of the Congress.
- (c) Non-Cooperation Movement was launched.
- (d) Decision to participate in the Round Table Conference in London was taken.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Important Sessions of INC
Option (a) is incorrect: Attainment of Self- Government was declared as the objective of the Congress in the Calcutta Session, 1906.
Option (b) is correct: Attainment of Poorna Swaraj was adopted as the goal of the Congress in the Lahore Session, 1929 under the presidentship of Jawaharlal Nehru. Along with this, the Congress made the decision to abstain from the First Round Table Conference because the British Government declined to call a Constituent Assembly to draft a constitution for India. Launch of a civil disobedience movement for complete independence and 26 January to be observed as ‘Independence Day’/Swarajya Day were also decided in the Lahore Session.
Option (c) is incorrect: Mahatma Gandhi moved the Non-cooperation resolution in the Special Calcutta Session of Congress in 1920.
Option (d) is incorrect: Decision to participate in the Round Table Conference in London was taken in the Karachi Session of Congress in 1931.




NOTE: Question on the Lahore Session of the Indian National Congress (1929) earlier came in 2012. This particular theme is a high-yielding theme and if the aspirants cover this theme/sub-theme diligently then questions from this section may appear as low-hanging fruits which an aspirant cannot miss.**

---

### Question 5

The Radcliffe Committee was appointed to:

- (a) Solve the problem of minorities in India
- (b) Given effect to the Independence Bill
- (c) Delimit the boundaries between India and Pakistan
- (d) Enquire into the riots in East Bengal
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Last phase of Indian Freedom Struggle/Boundary Commission/Mountbatten Plan/Transfer of Power

In the event of Partition, a boundary commission led by Sir Cyril Radcliffe was established which was to delimit the boundaries between India and Pakistan. Boundary Commission, consultative committee created in July 1947 to recommend how the Punjab and Bengal regions of the Indian subcontinent were to be divided between India and Pakistan shortly before each was to become independent from Britain.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

Consider the following pairs:

Vitamin Deficiency :    Disease

Vitamin C                   Scurvy
Vitamin D                   Rickets
Vitamin E                   Night blindness

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Vitamins



In human bodies, deficiencies in one or more nutrients can lead to illnesses or problems. The diseases are illnesses that develop over an extended period of time as a result of nutrient deficiency
Vitamin A   Night blindness
Vitamin B1   Beriberi
Vitamin B2   Ariboflavinosis
Vitamin B3   Pellagra
Vitamin B5   Paresthesia
Vitamin B6   Anemia
Vitamin B7   Dermatitis, enteritis
Vitamin B9 & Vitamin B12   Megaloblastic anemia
Vitamin C ___________ Scurvy, Swelling of



Gums

Vitamin D   Rickets & Osteomalacia
Vitamin E_________ Less Fertility
Vitamin K ________  Non-Clotting of Blood**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following diseases:

Diphtheria
Chickenpox
Smallpox

Which of the above diseases has/have been eradicated in India ?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Disease



Diphtheria: The bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheria is the cause of the infectious illness diphtheria. The throat and upper airways are the site of the main infection. According to data from the Central Bureau of Health Intelligence, India reported 41,672 cases of diphtheria between 2005 and 2014 (an average of 4,167 cases per year), with 897 deaths (a case fatality ratio of 2.2%). 84% of the cases recorded nationwide were in ten states: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Nagaland, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and West Bengal.
Chickenpox: The varicella-zoster virus, which causes chickenpox, is a highly contagious   While  it  primarily affects children, it can also impact adults. People are still concerned about chicken pox, and the government is working to eradicate it completely.

Smallpox: Smallpox is an acute contagious illness brought on by the variola virus, an orthopoxvirus. Before it was destroyed, it was one of the most terrible diseases that had ever struck mankind. It has supposedly been.**

---

### Question 3

In addition to fingerprint scanning, which of the following can be used in the biometric identification of a person?

Iris scanning
Retinal scanning
Voice recognition

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d)1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Biometric

In computer science Biometrics identification is used as a form of identification and  access control
Biometric identifiers are the distinct, measurable characteristics used to label individuals.
Behavioural Indicators: Physiological characteristics are distinguished from behavioural traits when classifying biometric identifiers. Fingerprint, palm veins, face recognition, DNA, palm print, hand geometry, iris recognition, retina, and odour/scent are examples of physiological biometric identifiers. Gait, voice, and typing rhythm are behavioural indicators.
Iris scanning

It is a form of biometric technology which uses visible and near-infrared light to take a high-contrast photograph of a person’s iris.
Retinal scanning
It maps the unique patterns of a person’s retina.
The blood vessels within the retina absorb light more readily than the surrounding tissue and thus easily identify with appropriate lighting.
It is highly accurate and difficult to spoof, in terms of identification.


Voice recognition

It is a computer software program which can decode the human voice.
It is used to operate a device or perform commands**

---

### Question 4

With reference to Agni-IV Missile, which of the following statements is/are correct?

It is a surface-to-surface
It is fuelled by liquid propellant
It can deliver one-tonne nuclear warheads about 7500 km away.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Defence Technology
About Agni-IV Missile:

It is a nuclear-capable long-range ballistic missile with a strike range of 4,000 km. (Statement 3 is incorrect:)
It is a two-stage solid propellant missile. (Statement 2 is incorrect)
It is a surface-to-surface  (Statement 1 is correct)
It is 20 metres long with a weight of 17 tonnes.
It is the fourth in the Agni series of missiles.
It can deliver one-tonne nuclear warheads.




Agni Class of Missiles:

They are the mainstay of India’s nuclear launch capability.
Range of other Agni Missiles:

Agni I: Range of 700-800 km.
Agni II: Range more than 2000 km.
Agni III: Range of more than 2,500 Km
Agni IV: Range is more than 3,500 km and can fire from a road mobile launcher.
Agni-V: The longest of the Agni series, an Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) with a range of over 5,000 km







 



IGMDP (Integrated Guided Missile Development Program)

It was conceived by  A.P.J. Abdul Kalam to enable India attain self-sufficiency in the field of missile technology. It was approved by the Government of India in 1983 and completed in March 2012.
The 5 missiles (P-A-T-N-A) developed under this program are:

Prithvi: Short range surface to surface ballistic missile.
Agni: Ballistic missiles with different ranges, i.e. Agni (1,2,3,4,5)
Trishul: Short range low level surface to air missile.
Nag: 3rd generation anti-tank missile.
Akash: Medium range surface to air missile.**

---

### Question 5

Which one of the following is the process involved in photosynthesis?

- (a) Potential energy is released to form free energy.
- (b) Free energy is converted into potential energy and stored.
- (c) Food is oxidised to release carbon dioxide and water.
- (d) Oxygen is taken, and carbon dioxide and water vapour are given out.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Photosynthesis
About Photosynthesis:

Photosynthesis– It is the process through which green plants and some other organisms convert light energy into chemical
The functions of the chlorophyll, a green pigment, are related to the transformation of inefficient solar energy into useful chemical energy. The majority of the time, the photosynthetic process makes use of water and emits the oxygen that is vitally necessary for our continued existence.





6H2O + 6CO2 ¾¾→ C6H12O6+ 6O2





Photosynthesis uses light energy for conversion of carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen gas.
The potential energy stored in the molecular bonds of glucose convert into kinetic energy after cellular respiration.
Chemical bonds are a type of stored or “potential” energy because when the bonds break, energy is released.
Photosynthesis converts water and carbon dioxide into sugar and oxygen through sunlight as the A by product of the photosynthesis process is the released oxygen into the atmosphere.**

---

### Question 6

Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding vegetative propagation of plants?

Vegetative propagation produces a clonal population.
Vegetative propagation helps in eliminating the virus.
Vegetative propagation can be practised most of the year.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Plant Reproduction

Statement 1 is correct: Vegetative reproduction is a type of asexual reproduction in plants. In this process new organisms arise without production of seeds . It helps in clone development.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Vegetative reproduction only includes mitosis, which guarantees that the genetic information in the DNA of vegetative progeny (child) is identical to that in the mother plant and allows for year-round use. However, it has no effect on the removal of viruses. A plant that has been repeatedly infected by a virus typically carries the infection for its whole lifespan. Therefore, any vegetative portions used for reproduction stay contaminated.
Statement 3 is correct: Vegetative propagation also allows plants to circumvent the immature seedling phase and reach the mature phase faster. In nature, that increases the chances for a plant to successfully reach maturity, and, commercially, it saves farmers a lot of time and money as it allows for faster crop overturn. It can be practised throughout the year.**

---

### Question 7

Which of the following is/are the example/examples of chemical change?

Crystallisation of sodium chloride
Melting of ice
Souring of milk

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Basic and Everyday Science
The Correct answer is Option (b): About Chemical Change:

It involves  the  transformation  of  one material into another, the creation of new materials with unique properties, and the creation of one or more new substances.
It happens when two compounds mix to create a new material (synthesis or either decomposes to form more substances). An example of a chemical change that results in a reaction is the oxidation reaction. Examples include burning wood, sour milk, cooking eggs, heating sugar to make caramel, and rusting iron.

About Physical Change:

No new chemical species
Since the identity of the matter does not change, changing a pure substance’s state from solid to liquid or gas constitutes a physical change.For instance: Ice melting, boiling water, sodium chloride crystallisation, etc.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following techniques/phenomena:

Budding and grafting in fruit plants
Cytoplasmic male sterility
Gene silencing

Which of the above is/are used to create transgenic crops ?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Genetics/Biotechnology

Statement 1 is incorrect: In the budding process, a bud is taken from one plant and grown on another, it does not lead to any genetic modification.
Statement 2 is correct: The Cytoplasmic male sterility systems are widely utilised in crop plants for hybrid breeding due to the convenience of controlling sterility.
Statement 3 is correct: Gene Silencing using RNA interference technology, transcriptional gene silencing, virus induced gene silencing has been used in horticultural techniques**

---

### Question 9

Consider the following statements:

Maize can be used for the production of starch.
Oil extracted from maize can be a feedstock for biodiesel.
Alcoholic beverages can be produced by using maize.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Basic and Everyday science

Statement 1 is correct: Corn wet-milling is a process of breaking corn kernels into their component parts: corn oil, protein, corn starch, and fibre. It uses water and a series of steps to separate the parts to be used for various products.
Statement 2 is correct: Chemically speaking, biodiesel is a combination of long-chain fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs). Maize oil can be used to make ethanol or biodiesel. The sort of alcohol found in the alcoholic beverages we consume is a substance known as ethanol.
Statement 3 is correct: Grain, fruit, or vegetable fermentation is the process used to produce alcohol. Grain such as maize and other grains is a typical source of ethanol.**

---

### Question 10

Among the following organisms, which one does not belong to the class of the other three?

- (a) Crab
- (b) Mite
- (c) Scorpion
- (d) Spider
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Species and Subspecies
The Correct answer is Option (a): About Organisms:

Mite, Spider and Scorpion belong to the category of Arachnids, whereas Crabs belong to the category of crustaceans.
Arachnida is a class of joint-legged invertebrate animals (arthropods), in the subphylum Arachnida includes, among others, spiders, scorpions, ticks, mites, pseudoscorpions, harvestmen, camel spiders, whip spiders and vinegaroons.
Nearly all arachnids are terrestrial and have eight legs, while some species have evolved their front pair of legs into sensory organs.
The group of arthropods known as crustaceans, which includes crabs, lobsters, crayfish, shrimp, krill, barnacles, brine shrimp, copepods, ostracods, and mantis shrimp, is quite big.
The majority of crustaceans are aquatic, free-living creatures, although others are sessile, terrestrial, or parasitic (e.g., woodlice, fish lice, or tongue worms) (e.g. barnacles).**

---

### Question 11

Which one of the following is the correct sequence of a food chain?

- (a) Diatoms-Crustaceans-Herrings
- (b) Crustaceans-Diatoms-Herrings
- (c) Diatoms-Herrings-Crustaceans
- (d) Crustaceans-Herrings-Diatoms
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Food Chain
The Correct answer is Option (a): About Food Chain:

Food chain is the pathway for transfer of food energy from green plants (producers) through a series of organisms with repeated consumption and being consumed.
Eg. Grasses → Grasshopper → Frog → Snake → Hawk/Eagle.
Every step in the food chain is called trophic level. A food chain starts with producers and ends with top The trophic level of an organism is the position at which it is placed in a food chain. The food chain starts with a producer and ends with a top consumer.
Phytoplankton are the primary producers in the oceans. They include:

diatoms (unicellular algae),
coccolithophores (unicellular, eukaryotic protist),
Cyanobacteria (Blue Green algae)– Synechococcus, Prochlorococcus, Nostoc, spirogyra etc.
Dinoflagellates (flagellated protists).


The group of arthropods known as crustaceans, which includes crabs, lobsters, crayfish, shrimp, krill, and barnacles, is quite big.
Fish called herrings devour**

---

### Question 12

With reference to technology for solar power production, consider the following statements:

‘Photovoltaics’ is a technology that generates electricity by direct conversion of light into electricity, while ‘Solar Thermal’ is a technology that utilises the Sun’s rays to generate heat which is further used in the electricity generation process.
Photovoltaics-generates Alternating Current (AC), while Solar Thermal generates Direct Current (DC).
India has a manufacturing base for Solar Thermal technology, but not for photovoltaics.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub -Theme: Non-conventional Energy/ Renewable Energy/Solar Energy

Statement 1 is correct: Photovoltaic (PV) technologies – which are commonly known as solar panels – produce power through devices that absorb energy from sunlight and convert it into electrical energy through semiconducting materials. Then, these components—known as solar cells—are coupled to create bigger power-generating structures called modules or panels. However, in solar thermal, a fluid is boiled using sunshine. Depending on the use, this liquid could be water or any other liquid.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Solar thermal does not generate electricity, it does convertion of solar radiation into heat.
Statement 3 is incorrect: India has a manufacturing base for both solar thermal and photovoltaics.**

---

### Question 13

Consider the following:

Bats
Bears
Rodents

The phenomenon of hibernation can be observed in which of the above kinds of animals?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (d) Hibernation cannot be observed in any of the above
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Adaptation/Response to abiotic factors
The Correct answer is Option (c): About Hibernation:

Hibernation is a state of inactivity and metabolic depression in endotherms. It has a low metabolic rate, slow breathing, slow heartbeat, and low body temperature. For example, it is present in bats, bears, and 
When there is not enough food available, hibernation serves to conserve An endothermic animal lowers its metabolic rate and subsequently its body temperature to achieve this energy savings.
Larger species develop hyperphagia, when they consume a lot of food and store the energy as fat.
In many tiny species, food storage takes the place of eating and fat development.
An endotherm is an organism which maintains its body at a metabolically stable temperature, by the use of heat released by its internal bodily functions rather than relying almost purely on ambient heat e.g People, polar bears, penguins, and prairie**

---

### Question 14

Which of the following adds/add carbon dioxide to the carbon cycle on the planet Earth?

Volcanic action
Respiration
Photosynthesis
Decay of organic matter

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Carbon cycle

Statement 1 is correct: Volcanic action leads to the release of Carbon dioxide.
Statement 2 is correct: Respiration is the movement of oxygen from the outside environment to the cells within tissues and the release of carbon dioxide in the opposite direction.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The photosynthesis process absorbs carbon dioxide and emits oxygen. Therefore, photosynthesis does not cause the carbon cycle to gain more carbon dioxide. The process by which plants convert carbon dioxide, water, and sunshine into oxygen and sugar-based energy is known as photosynthesis.
Statement 4 is correct: The process of decomposition releases Carbon dioxide.**

---

### Question 15

Lichens, which are capable of initiating ecological succession even on a bare rock, are actually a symbiotic association of

- (a) Algae and bacteria
- (b) Algae and fungi
- (c) Bacteria and fungi
- (d) Fungi and mosses
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Ecological succession
The Correct answer is Option (b): About Ecological Succession:

Ecological succession  is  the  process of change in the species structure of an ecological community over time. Successional dynamics beginning with colonisation of an area that has not been previously occupied by an ecological community are referred to as primary succession. This includes newly exposed rock or sand surfaces, lava flows, and newly exposed glacial tills. The stages of primary succession include pioneer microorganisms, plants (lichens and mosses), grassy stage, smaller shrubs, and trees.
Lichens are a complex life form that is a symbiotic partnership of two separate organisms, a fungus and an alga where the dominant partner is the fungus, that provides the lichen the majority of its characteristics, from its thallus shape to its fruiting bodies.**

---

---

