# UPSC Prelims 2015 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

With reference to Indian history, which of the following is/are the essential element/elements of the feudal system?

A very strong centralized political authority and a very weak provincial or local political authority
The emergence of an administrative structure based on control and possession of the land.
Creation of lord-vassal relationship between the feudal lord and his overlord

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Feudalism in India
Statement 1 is incorrect: Feudalism, in its various forms, usually emerged as a result of the decentralization of an empire which lacked the bureaucratic infrastructure necessary to administer grand empires. In the medieval era, feudalism was the predominant socio- economic structure. In this feudal system, the nobility owned land from the Crown in return for military service, and vassals were tenants of the nobles. The peasants were required to reside on their lord’s land and to offer him homage, labor, and a share of the production in exchange for military protection
Statement 2 is correct: An essential feature of Feudalism was the emergence of an administrative structure to maintain control and possession of land and effectively generate massive revenues from them.
Statement 3 is correct: A person became a vassal by pledging political allegiance and providing military, political, and financial service to a lord.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following pairs:

Medieval Indian State
Present Region


1. Champaka
Central India


2. Durgara
Jammu


3. Kuluta
Malabar

Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Past and Present name of Medieval Indian State
Correct answer is Option (b):

The 9th century saw the rise of a number of hill states, some of which maintained their identity until recent years, despite their wars with each other and frequent raids from the plain areas.



Medieval Indian state
Present Region


Champaka
Chamba


Durgara
Jammu






Kuluta
Kullu


Malwa
Central India


Kamarupa
Assam


Trigarta
Jalandhar


Utkala
Odisha


Twipra
Tripura**

---

### Question 3

Who of the following founded a new city on the south bank of a tributary to river Krishna and undertook to rule his new kingdom as the agent of a deity to whom all the land south of the river Krishna was supposed to belong?

- (a) Amoghavarsha I
- (b) Ballala II
- (c) Harihara I
- (d) Prataparudra II
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Political aspect of Vijayanagar Empire
Correct answer is Option (c):Vijayanagara or the “city of victory” empire was founded in the fourteenth century by Harihara and Bukka (1336).

It encompassed the entire Krishna- Tungabhadra Doab peninsula, extending from the river Krishna in the north to its furthest southern point.
Harihara I founded a new city on the south bank of a tributary to river Krishna and undertook to rule his new kingdom as the agent of a deity to whom all the land south of the river Krishna belonged.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following:

The arrival of Babur into India led to the:

introduction of gunpowder in the subcontinent
introduction of the arch and dome in the region’s architecture
establishment of Timurid dynasty in the region

Select the correct answer using the codes given

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Political aspect during the Mughals

Statement 1 is incorrect: Gunpowder was first used in the Indian subcontinent during the Mongol invasion. When Babur acquired control of Bhera in India in 1519, it was his first significant mission.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The introduction of Islamic architectural details, such as true domes and arches, and the fusion of Indian and Islamic architectural forms were the Delhi Sultanate’s biggest contributions to Indian fine arts.
Statement 3 is correct: The Timurids, an islamic Sunni dynasty, had two notable empires in history. The Timurid Empire (1370–1507) in Persia and Central Asia and the Mughal Empire (1526–1857) in India was greatly impacted by Persian culture.**

---

---

## Art Culture

### Question 1

With reference to the art and archaeological history of India, which one among the following was made earliest?

- (a) Lingaraja Temple at Bhubaneswar
- (b) Rock-cut Elephant at Dhauli
- (c) Rock-cut Monuments Mahabalipuram
- (d) Varaha Image at Udayagiri
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Ancient Architecture/Sculpture/ Rock cut Cave
Option (b) is correct: The rock-cut elephant situated in Dhauli was constructed during the reign of Ashoka, who ruled from 272-231 BCE. On the other hand, the Lingaraj Temple was built in the 11th century AD, while the rock-cut monuments in Mahabalipuram were constructed during the 7th and 8th centuries AD. Additionally, the Varaha Image was built in the 5th century AD.

The rock-cut elephant at Dhauli was built during the reign of Ashoka (272-231 BCE).
Lingaraj temple in Bhubaneshwar: The largest temple in the city of Bhubaneswar (Odisha), Lingaraj Temple, was constructed in the 11th century AD and dedicated to Lord Shiva.
Mahabalipuram: The rock-cut monu- ments at Mahabalipuram were built by the Pallava king Narasimha in the 7th and 8th centuries.
Varaha Image at Udayagiri was built in the 5th century This image was engraved by Chandragupta on the hill of Udayagiri to commemorate the victory over the foreign Shaka kings.





Note: Question on Varaha Avatar (boar incarnation) of Vishnu at Udayagiri caves earlier asked in 2014. The same theme was repeated in 2015.**

---

### Question 2

Kalamkari painting refers to:

- (a) A hand-painted cotton textile in South India
- (b) A handmade drawing on bamboo handicrafts in NorthEast India
- (c) A block-painted woollen cloth in the Western Himalayan region of India
- (d) A hand-painted decorative silk cloth in North- Western India
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Indian Painting Schools Correct answer is Option (a): Kalamkari:

This particular cotton textile is made in Andhra Pradesh and is either hand- painted or block-printed.
In this style, the kalam(pen) is used for freehand drawing of the subject and filling in the colours and is entirely done by hand.
The present states of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh are where kalamkari first appeared.
Kalamkari was first used to depict scenes from sacred texts such as the Mahabharata, Ramayana and Bhagavatam.**

---

### Question 3

Which of the following kingdoms were associated with the life of the Buddha?

Avanti
Gandhara
Kosala
Magadha

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d) 3 and 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Buddhism
Option (d) is correct: Kosala and Magadha were the two kingdoms associated with the life of the Buddha.

Buddha travelled through the kingdoms of Kosala, Magadha, Vaishali and Vajji in order to preach his philosophy.
Avanti had no direct connection to Buddha’s life.
Gandhara received Buddhist influence during the time of Ashoka When the Mauryan empire expanded up to
As per various Pali texts, it is known that Prasenjit, king of Kosala was a contemporary of Buddha.




NOTE: Same question came in consecutive years i.e 2014 and 2015. Here comes the advantage of reading PYQs, bonus of 2+ marks !! Jainism and Buddhism are all-time favourite topics of UPSC, preparing them in details always reap rich dividends.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

Which one of the following is the best description of the term ‘ecosystem’?

- (a) A community of organisms interacting with one another
- (b) That part of the Earth which is inhabited by living organisms
- (c) A community of organisms together with the environment in which they live
- (d) The flora and fauna of a geographical area
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Ecosystem
Option (c) is the correct answer: Ecosystem can be defined as a community of organisms together with the environment in which they live.
Ecosystem:

An ecosystem can be defined as a functional unit of nature, where living organisms (producers, consumers, and decomposers) interact among themselves and also with the surrounding physical 
An ecosystem can be of any size but usually encompasses specific and limited species. E.g. Aquatic Ecosystem.
In the ecosystem, biotic and abiotic components are linked together through nutrient cycles and energy flows.
Everything that lives in an ecosystem is dependent on the other species and elements that are also part of that ecological community.
A damaged or extinct component of an ecosystem has an effect on the entire system.**

---

### Question 2

What can be the impact of excessive/inappropriate use of nitrogenous fertilizers in agriculture?

1. Proliferation of nitrogen fixing microorganisms in soil can occur.

2. Increase in the acidity of soil can take place.

3. Leaching of nitrate to the groundwater can occur.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Soil Pollution
Impact of Excessive/inappropriate use of nitrogenous fertilizers:

The necessity for nitrogen-fixing bacteria decreases as soil nitrogen levels increase.
The soil becomes more acidic and nitrate leaches into the groundwater when nitrogenous fertilisers are used excessively or inappropriately.
Fertilizers in agriculture increase inputs of nutrients to soils affecting their pH value
The molecule of nitrogen change soil pH in the form of uncharged urea molecule, the cation ammonium and the anion nitrate
The conversion of Nitrogen from one form to the other involves the generation or consumption of acidity and the uptake of urea, ammonium or nitrate by plants will also affect the acidity of the soil. Due to the leaching process, these substances accumulate underground.

Statement 1 is incorrect: More nitrogen in the soil leads to less need for nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Statement 2 and 3 are correct: Excessive/ inappropriate use of nitrogenous fertilizers increases the acidity of soil and the leaching of nitrate into the groundwater.
NOTE: Excessive or inappropriate use of anything will have a negative impact on the environment, there should be a balance in everything. Now, look at the extreme keyword in the first statement. ‘Proliferation’     which   means ‘rapid increase’, think logically, is it possible that the use of excessive nitrogenous fertilizer will proliferate the nitrogen-fixing microorganisms in soil? Having said that, it is also advisable to read this topic thoroughly as it is very important and high yielding both in terms of prelims and mains.**

---

### Question 3

Which one of the following is associated with the issue of control and phasing out of the use of ozone- depleting substances?

- (a) Bretton Woods Conference
- (b) Montreal Protocol
- (c) Kyoto Protocol
- (d) Nagoya Protocol
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer
Montreal Protocol

It is a protocol to the Vienna Convention and it deals with the substances that deplete the Ozone Layer (ozone-depleting substance- ODS).
It was the first treaty to achieve universal
The protocol recognizes that all nations should not be treated equally.

Option (a) is incorrect: Bretton Woods Conference established the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Option (b) is correct: Montreal Protocol is a protocol to the Vienna Convention and it deals with the substances that deplete the Ozone Layer (ozone-depleting substance-ODS).
Option (c) is incorrect: Kyoto Protocol deals with the reduction of Greenhouse gas.
Option (d) is incorrect: Nagoya Protocol is a supplementary agreement to the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) on “Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization”.**

---

### Question 4

What is the Rio+20 Conference, often mentioned in the news?

- (a) It is the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
- (b) It is a Ministerial Meeting of the World Trade Organization
- (c) It is a Conference of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
- (d) It is a Conference of the Member Countries of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Major Environment Conventions, Conference, etc.

Rio+20 is the short name for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development which took place in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 2012, twenty years after the landmark 1992 Earth Summit in
At the Rio+20 Conference, world leaders, along with thousands of participants from the private sector, NGOs and other groups, came together to shape how we can reduce poverty, advance social equity and ensure environmental protection on an ever more crowded planet.
The official discussions focussed on two main themes:

How to build a green economy to achieve sustainable development and lift people out of poverty; and
How to improve international coordination for sustainable development.**

---

### Question 5

The Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee is constituted under the

- (a) Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006
- (b) Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
- (c) Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
- (d) Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Genetically Modified Crops
Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee

The Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee was constituted under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
The Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC) functions under the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC).
It is responsible for the appraisal of activities involving large-scale use of hazardous microorganisms and recombinants in research and industrial production from the environmental angle.
The committee is also responsible for the appraisal of proposals relating to the release of genetically engineered (GE) organisms and products into the environment including experimental field trials.
GEAC is chaired by the Special Secretary/ Additional Secretary of MoEF&CC and co-chaired by a representative from the Department of Biotechnology (DBT)

NOTE: There are recurrent and repeated questions on “Genetic Engineering” either in science-tech or environment. It is advisable to prepare this topic thoroughly and holistically.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to an organisation known as ‘BirdLife International’, which of the following statements is/ are correct?

It is a Global Partnership of Conservation
The concept of ‘biodiversity hotspots’ originated from this organisation.
It identifies the sites known/referred to as ‘Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas’.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Major Conservation Organizations
BirdLife International

BirdLife International is an international alliance of conservation groups that works to protect birds, their habitats, and the world’s biodiversity while collaborating with people to ensure the sustainable use of natural resources.
With more than 120 partner groups, it is the largest cooperation of conservation organisations in the world.
The IUCN’s designated Red List Authority for birds is BirdLife International.
It lists the locations that are designated as “Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas.”

Statement 1 is correct: BirdLife International is a global partnership of conservation organisations that strives to conserve birds, their habitats, and global biodiversity, working with people towards sustainability in the use of natural resources.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The idea of Biodiversity Hotspots was first put forward by Norman Myers in 1988.
Statement 3 is correct: It identifies the sites known/referred to as ‘Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas’.**

---

### Question 7

With reference to the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resource (IUCN) and the Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. IUCN is an organ of the United Nations and CITES is an international agreement between

2. IUCN runs thousands of field projects around the world to better manage natural environments.

3. CITES is legally binding on the States that have joined it, but this Conventional does not take the place of national laws.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Major Environmental Conventions
Statement 1 is incorrect: IUCN is an NGO, founded in October 1948 as the International Union for the Protection of Nature (or IUPN) following an international conference in Fontainebleau, France. Later the name was changed to International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN). CITES on the other hand is an intergovernmental treaty, concluded under the aegis of the United Nations Environment Programme.
Statement 2 is correct: IUCN supports scientific research, manages field projects globally and brings governments, non-government organisations, United Nations agencies, companies and local communities together to develop and implement policy.
Statement 3 is correct: CITES is legally binding but does not take the place of national laws.




NOTE: Only knowing the names of UN specialised agencies is enough for solving this question. With this knowledge, we can eliminate option 1 and get the correct answer. Most of the time the examiner connects two different statements in which one is correct and the other is incorrect. It is advisable to ascertain the correctness of both connected statements and don’t rush after only reading a partial statement.**

---

### Question 8

Which of the following statements regarding ‘Green Climate Fund’ is/are correct?

1. It is intended to assist developing countries in adaptation and mitigation practices to counter climate change.

2. It is founded under the aegis of UNEP, OECD, Asian Development Bank and World Bank.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Global Climate Finance Architecture
Green Climate Fund (GCF)

It is a UNFCCC financial tool.
Through the idea of country ownership, GCF initiatives are in line with the interests of developing nations.
It aims to contribute significantly to the worldwide community’s mitigation and adaptation efforts to combat climate change.

Statement 1 is correct: Green Climate Fund aims to make an ambitious contribution to attaining the mitigation and adaptation goals of the international community to counter climate change.
Statement 2 is incorrect: GCF was discussed in Cancun Summit 2010 of UNFCCC and finally adopted in Durban Summit 2011.**

---

### Question 9

Which of the following National Parks is unique in being a swamp with floating vegetation that supports a rich biodiversity?

- (a) Bhitarkanika National Park
- (b) Keibul Lamjao National Park
- (c) Keoladeo Ghana National Park
- (d) Sultanpur National Park
Explanation


**Ans: b          
 Sub-Theme: National Parks/ Tiger Reserve/ Biosphere Reserve/Wildlife Sanctuary/Wetland
Option (b) is the correct answer: Keibul Lamjao National Park in the Bishnupur district of the Indian state of Manipur is the only floating park in existence and is a crucial component of Loktak Lake, which lies in North East India. Locally known as “Phumdi,” the national park is distinguished by floating decaying plant matter. It was established in 1966 as a wildlife sanctuary to protect the Eld’s deer’s natural habitat, which is in risk of extinction (Cervus eldi eldi). It was declared a national park in 1977. The park is unique in that it is “too shallow to be a lake, too deep to be marsh.”
Flora: The park offers a diverse array of aquatic, wetland, and terrestrial ecosystems and is mostly made up of damp, semi-evergreen forests.
Fauna found in the park include the brow- antlered deer (Cervus eldi eldi), which is its emblematic species, as well as the Asian Golden Cat, Marbled Cat, Malayan Bear, Hog Deer, Himalayan Black Bear, and others.**

---

### Question 10

Which one of the following National Parks has a climate that varies from tropical to subtropical, temperate and arctic?

- (a) Khangchendzonga National Park
- (b) Nanda Devi National Park
- (c) Neora Valley National Park
- (d) Namdapha National Park
Explanation


**Ans: d          
 Sub-Theme: National Parks/ Tiger Reserve/ Biosphere Reserve/Wildlife Sanctuary/Wetland
Option (d) is the correct answer: The Namdapha National Park is located 27° N of the equator. It is located at the international border between India and Myanmar (Burma) in Changlang District, Arunachal Pradesh in northeast India. Geographically, Namdapha National Park is in the sub-tropical zone because it is 27° N of the equator, but because its altitude ranges from 200 m to 4571 m, its climate changes and it also experiences a lot of rain. There are different types of climates, such as tropical, subtropical, temperate, and arctic. For instance, the Namdapha National Park’s mountainous region has a mountain climate, whereas the low-lying plains and valleys experience a tropical climate. It was established as the 15th Tiger Reserve of India by the Government in 1983.**

---

### Question 11

With reference to ‘dugong’, a mammal found in India, which of the following statements is/are correct?

It is a herbivorous marine animal.
It is found along the entire coast of India.
It is given legal protection under Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: c         
 Sub-Theme: Marine Species
Statement 1 is correct: Sea Cow or Dugong is one of the four surviving species in the Order Sirenia and it is the only existing species of herbivorous mammal that lives exclusively in the sea including in India.
Statement 2 is incorrect: They are found in over 30 countries and in India are seen in the Gulf of Mannar, Gulf of Kutch, Palk Bay, and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Statement 3 is correct: It gives legal protection under Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.**

---

### Question 12

Which one of the following is the national aquatic animal of India?

- (a) Saltwater crocodile
- (b) Olive ridley turtle
- (c) Gangetic dolphin
- (d) Gharial
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Marine Species
Option (c) is the correct answer: Gangetic River Dolphin, also called ‘susu’ is the National Aquatic Animal of India.
 Gangetic Dolphin

Scientific Name: Platanista gangetica
The Ganges River Dolphin was officially discovered in 1801.
They are also called ‘susu’ is the National Aquatic Animal of India.

Habitat:

Live in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna and Karnaphuli-Sangu river systems of Nepal, India, and Bangladesh.
The Ganges river dolphin can only live in freshwater

Features:

Essentially blind.
They hunt by emitting ultrasonic sounds, which bounces off of fish and other prey, enabling them to “see” an image in their mind.**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

In the South Atlantic and South-Eastern Pacific regions in tropical latitudes, cyclone does not What is the reason?

- (a) Sea surface temperatures are low
- (b) Inter-tropical Convergence Zone seldom occurs
- (c) Coriolis force is too weak
- (d) Absence of land in those regions
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Wind Movement
Option (b) is correct: The absence of cyclones can be demonstrated by the seldom occurance of ITCZ Convergence zone in the south east Pacific and south Atlantic regions. Due to this there is no creation of ideal conditions for Tropical Cyclone, for e.g. instead of low, there is high vertical wind sheer.
Cyclone:

A cyclone is a weather phenomenon characterized by a low-pressure center surrounded by a rotating system of winds that spiral inward.

Classification of Cyclone:

Tropical Cyclone
Extra tropical  cyclone  also  called

Temperate cyclone
Factors Responsible for for Tropical Cyclone Formation:

Warm Ocean Water: Cyclones form over warm ocean water, typically with temperatures of 26 degrees Celsius or higher. This warm water provides the energy that fuels the storm.
Low Atmospheric Pressure: Cyclones form in areas where the atmospheric pressure is low. This creates an area of low pressure that draws in warm, moist air from the surrounding environment.
Coriolis Effect: The Coriolis effect is a phenomenon caused by the rotation of the Earth. It causes air to be deflected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. This effect is what causes cyclones to spin in a clockwise direction in the Southern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere.
Humidity: Cyclones require a high level of humidity in order to form. This is because the warm, moist air that is drawn into the low-pressure center of the storm helps to fuel its growth and intensity.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements:

1. The winds which blow between 30 N and 60 S latitudes throughout the year are known as westerlies.

2. The moist air masses that cause winter rains in North-Western region of India are part of  westerlies

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Wind Movement/Indian Monsoon Option (b) is correct: Generally the westerlies flow between 30° and 60°N and 30° and 60°S
latitude respectively. The moist air masses that
cause winter rains in North-Western region of India are part of westerlies which are also known as winter disturbances.
Westerlies:

The westerlies are the winds blowing from the subtropical high pressure belts towards the sub polar low pressure belts.
The Westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm, equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts of continents that is the eastern section of the Oceans in the temperate zone.





Note: In this question, the examiner made a simple but difficult to observe change in latitudes i.e “30 N and 60 S latitudes” to make the statement incorrect. Always read questions carefully and cautiously. Although we read incorrect statements in the exam hall, our mind correlates it to what we have read in the textbook/standard book, making it difficult to identify minor twists and twicks. Earlier, UPSC had asked questions on westerlies in 2011. Revising PYQ and doing peripheral research is always important from prelims perspective.**

---

### Question 3

“Each day is more or less the same, the morning is clear and bright with a sea breeze; as the Sun climbs high in the sky, heat mounts up, dark clouds form, then rain comes with thunder and lightning. But the rain is soon over.”

Which of the following regions is described in the above passage?

- (a) Savannah
- (b) Equatorial
- (c) Monsoon
- (d) Mediterranean
Explanation


**Ans: (b)
Sub-Theme: Biomes/World Climate
Option (b) is correct: The above sentence indicates the characteristics of the Equatorial region.
Equatorial Climate:

Equatorial climate is typically hot and humid, with little seasonal variation in temperature. These regions are located near the equator, including parts of South America, Africa, and Asia. Precipitation is high and frequent throughout the year, with some areas receiving over 100 inches (250 cm) annually.These regions are also prone to tropical storms and cyclones, especially in coastal areas, which can cause significant damage to infrastructure and
Each day is more or less the same, the morning is clear and bright with a sea breeze; as the Sun climbs high in the sky, heat mounts up, dark clouds form, then rain comes with thunder and lightning. But the rain is soon over.





NOTE: Again a direct question came from GC Leong. Also please learn to identify keywords/keyphrases, anyone with a decent reading of NCERTs and GC Leong could easily answer this question. Questions on Equatorial climate have been repeated in 2013, therefore for detailed explanation on Equatorial Biomes please refer to respective PYQs.**

---

### Question 4

What explains the eastward flow of the equatorial counter current?

- (a) The Earth’s rotation on its axis
- (b) Convergence of the two equatorial currents
- (c) Difference in salinity of water
- (d) Occurrence of the belt of calm near the equator
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Equatorial Counter Currents
Option (a) is incorrect: As the earth rotates from west to east, water near the equator tends to move from east to west (due to the prevailing winds). This leads to the formation of Equatorial currents, both North and South of the equator.
Option (b) is correct: Piling up of water in the western pacific due to the convergence of the North Equatorial Current and South Equatorial Current. This piled up water then flows from west to east, under the effect of gravity, resulting in Counter Equatorial Current (CEC).
Option (c) is incorrect: Difference in salinity of water greatly influences vertical currents and its influence on horizontal movement is less significant.
Option (d) is incorrect: The Doldrums/ Equatorial belt around the Equator are zones of very calm winds, it has little effect on eastward flow of equatorial counter current.**

---

### Question 5

Tides occur in the oceans and seas due to which among the following?

Gravitational force of the Sun
Gravitational force of the Moon
Centrifugal force of the Earth

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Formation of Tides


Tides: The “tide” refers to the daily or twice- daily cyclic rise and fall of the sea level, which is primarily caused by the gravitational pull of the moon and the sun. Due to the significant fluctuations in frequency, size, and height of tides, studying them requires a tremendous deal of geographical and temporal complexity.
Tides occur due to a balance between all these forces such as Gravitational force of the Sun; Gravitational force of the Moon and Centrifugal force of the Earth.**

---

### Question 6

In India, the steel production industry requires the import of:

- (a) Saltpetre
- (b) Rock phosphate
- (c) Coking coal
- (d) All of the above
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Industry
Option (a) is incorrect: Saltpetre (Potassium nitrate) is not used in the production of Steel. It is used in the production of fertilizers, tree stump removal, rocket propellants and fireworks.
Option (b) is incorrect: Rock phosphate is used in the production of fertilizer and not for the production of Steel.
Option (c) is correct: The production of steel requires 0.8 tonnes of coking coal to produce one tonne of Steel. And about 85% of the coking coal requirement of the domestic steel industry is presently being met through imports.**

---

### Question 7

In India, in which one of the following types of forests is teak a dominant tree species?

- (a) Tropical moist deciduous forest
- (b) Tropical rainforest
- (c) Tropical thorn scrub forest
- (d) Temperate forest with Grasslands
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Natural Vegetation of India About Tropical Moist Deciduous Forest:
Climatic Conditions:

Annual rainfall 100 to 200 cm.
Mean annual temperature of about 27°C
The average annual relative humidity of 60 to 75 per cent.
Spring (between winter and summer) and summer are dry.


Characteristics:



In the spring and early summer, when there is insufficient rainfall, trees lose their
Extreme summers leave everything in a state of bareness (April-May).
Tropical moist deciduous forests have an irregular top storey that ranges from 25 to 60 meters.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following rivers:

Vamsadhara
Indravati
Pranahita
Pennar

Which of the above are tributaries of Godavari?

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 2, 3 and 4
- (c) 1, 2 and 4
- (d) 2 and 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Peninsular Drainage/River
About River Godavari:

The Godavari is India’s second longest and third-biggest river, after the Ganga.
Through a vast network of tributaries, the river eventually drains into the Bay of
The Godavari is the greatest river in peninsular India in terms of length, catchment area, and flow, and has been nicknamed the Dakshina Ganga, or “Southern ”
Indravati and Pranhita are the tributaries of Godavari.


Additional Information:

River Vamsadhara is an important east- flowing river between Rushikulya and Godavari, in Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. It is not a tributary of Godavari.
The Pennar rises in the Chennakesava hill of the Nandidurga range, in Chikkaballapura district of Karnataka and flows towards east eventually draining into the Bay of Bengal.**

---

### Question 9

In a particular region in India, the local people train the roots of living trees into robust bridges across the As the time passes, these bridges become stronger. These unique ‘living root bridges’ are found in

- (a) Meghalaya
- (b) Himachal Pradesh
- (c) Jharkhand
- (d) Tamil Nadu
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Living Root Bridges
Living root bridges also known as Jing Kieng Jri are found in Meghalaya are the aerial bridges that are built by weaving and manipulating the roots of the Indian rubber tree.

 
About Living Root Bridges:

In Meghalaya, one can find living root bridges. The aerial bridges, also referred to as Jing Kieng Jri, are constructed by tying and shaping the roots of Indian rubber
A living root bridge resembling a suspension bridge created by guiding the rubber fig tree’s (Ficus elastica) flexible roots across a stream or river and allowing them to develop and become stronger.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following States:

Arunachal Pradesh
Himachal Pradesh
Mizoram

In which of the above States do ‘Tropical Wet Evergreen Forests’ occur?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Natural Vegetation of India
Option 1 and 3 are correct: In India, tropical wet evergreen forests are found on the eastern and western slopes of the Western Ghats in such states like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra. And also found in Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, Mizoram, West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Option 2 is incorrect: Himachal Pradesh comes under the Montane type of forest.**

---

### Question 11

Which one of the following regions of India has a combination of mangrove forest, evergreen forest and deciduous forest?

- (a) North Coastal Andhra Pradesh
- (b) South-West Bengal
- (c) Southern Saurashtra
- (d) Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Natural vegetation of India
About Andaman and Nicobar Islands:
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands have a tropical rainforest canopy. The Middle Andamans harbours mostly moist deciduous forests. North
Andamans is characterised by the wet evergreen type, with plenty of woody climbers. Also The coastal regions have mangrove forests.**

---

### Question 12

Which one of the following pairs of States of India indicates the easternmost and westernmost State?

- (a) Assam and Rajasthan
- (b) Arunachal Pradesh and Rajasthan
- (c) Assam and Gujarat
- (d) Arunachal Pradesh and Gujarat
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Basic Understanding of Indian map
Most Points of India:

Guhar Moti is the westernmost point of India. It is a small village located in the Kutch district of Gujarat.
The northernmost point of India is located in the eastern Karakoram range in the Himalayas, near Indira Col, Siachen
The easternmost point is Kibithu in Arunachal Pradesh.
Indira Point in Great Nicobar Island is the southernmost point.**

---

### Question 13

Consider the following pairs:

Place of Pilgrimage
Location


1. Srisailam
Nallamala Hills


2. Omakareshwar
Satmala Hills


3. Pushkar
Mahadeo Hills

Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a

Sub-Theme: Famous pilgrim places of India
Pair 1 is correct: Srisailam is the shrine of Lord Mallikarjuna on the flat top of Nallamala Hills in Andhra Pradesh.The temple is dedicated to the deities Shiva and Parvati. This temple is one of Lord Shiva’s twelve Jyotirlingas and one of Goddess Parvati’s eighteen Shakti Peethas. The lingam is a representation of Shiva, who is worshiped as Mallikarjuna. Bhramaramba is a representation of Parvati.
Pair 2 is incorrect: Omkareshwar is situated on the Mandhata hills in Madhya Pradesh (ancient name: Shivpuri). The name “Omkareshwar” comes from the way the River Narmada flows here as it circles the Mandhata hill in the shape of a “Om.” Omkareshwar is a Hindu temple where the god Shiva is worshiped. It is one of Shiva’s 12 cherished Jyotirlinga shrines.
Pair 3 is incorrect: The Mahadeo Hills are a range of hills in Madhya Pradesh state of central India. Whereas, Pushkar is situated on the shore of Pushkar Lake in Ajmer, Rajasthan. It is famous for the red spired Brahma Temple.**

---

### Question 14

Which one of the following countries of South-West Asia does not open out to the Mediterranean Sea?

- (a) Syria
- (b) Jordan
- (c) Lebanon
- (d) Israel
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: World Map
Correct answer is Option (b): Jordan is a landlocked country and doesn’t have any opening into the Mediterranean Sea.

NOTE: In terms of world map, UPSC absolutely loves this region and there are many instances that they have asked questions from this region. Also, This region also very much remains in the news. Therefore, reading newspapers and practicing maps is very important for UPSC.**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

The Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane is approved by the:

- (a) Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.
- (b) Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices.
- (c) Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of Agriculture.
- (d) Agricultural Produce Market committee.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Government Policies
Fair and Remunerative Prices (FRP):

The Sugarcane Control Order, 1966, published under the Essential Commodities Act (ECA), 1955, specifies that FRP must be paid nationwide within 14 days of the cane’s delivery date.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) announced the decision following the Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices’ (CACP) recommendation.
The report by the Rangarajan Committee on restructuring the sugarcane sector serves as the foundation for the FRP.**

---

### Question 2

In India, markets in agricultural products are regulated under the

- (a) Essential Commodities Act, 1955
- (b) Agricultural Produce Market Committee Act enacted by States
- (c) Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937
- (d) Food Products Order, 1956 and Meat and Food Products Order, 1973
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Government Policies
Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC):

Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) under the State Government regulates the notified agricultural produce and livestock.
The State Government’s Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) oversees the listed agricultural products and livestock.
According to Schedule 7 of the Indian Constitution, agriculture is a state subject.
The entire state’s area has been divided up and designated as a market area (Yard Mandis), and market management is carried out by Market Committees established by the state governments.
No person or organisation is permitted to engage in wholesale marketing operations after a certain area is designated as a market area and comes under the control of a Market In order to transact, buyers must also get unique licences from each APMC.
It is a component of government policy aimed at ensuring food security, paying remunerative prices to the farmers, and providing fair prices to consumers.**

---

### Question 3

Consider the following statements:

1. The Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme was launched during 1996-97 to provide loan assistance to poor farmers.

2. The Command Area Development Programme was launched in 1974-75 for the development of water-use efficiency.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Sustainable Agriculture
Statement 1  is   incorrect:   Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme was launched in 1996-97 to give loan assistance to the states to help them to develop their major irrigation projects which are in an advanced stage of completion. Its objective was to expedite completion of ongoing irrigation projects.
Statement 2 is correct: The command area development programme was launched in 1974-75 to bridge the gap between irrigation potential and actual utilized major and medium irrigation schemes. Delivery of irrigation water to the fields is the ultimate objective of this scheme. The plan includes the creation of field channels, land contouring, and rotational water supply to ensure equitable distribution. It was restructured into the Command Area Development and Water Management Program 2004.**

---

### Question 4

The substitution of steel for wooden ploughs in agricultural production is an example of

- (a) Labour-augmenting technological progress
- (b) Capital-augmenting technological progress
- (c) Capital-reducing technological progress
- (d) None of the above
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Agricultural Infrastructure

Labour Augmenting is technology that increases skills and productivity of the existing labour force (example – teaching people how to use the computer).
Capital Augmenting technology enhances the productivity of existing capital goods. In this case, replacement of wood by steel, increases the productivity of plough.**

---

### Question 5

Which one of the following best describes the main objective of ‘Seed Village Concept’?

- (a) Encouraging the farmers to use their own farm seeds and discouraging them to buy the seeds from others
- (b) Involving the farmers for training in quality seed production and thereby to make available quality seeds to others at appropriate time and affordable cost
- (c) Earmarking some villages exclusively for the production of certified seeds
- (d) Identifying the entrepreneurs in villages and providing them technology and finance to set up seed companies
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Government Policies
Seed village Concept:

A village is referred to as a “seed village” if a trained group of farmers produces seeds for a variety of crops and provides for the requirements of themselves, their fellow villagers, and villagers in nearby villages at an affordable price.
Major focus areas are:

Clustering  or concentrating seed production in a small area
Introducing new, high-yielding types to replace the current local ones.
Increasing the seed production
To meet the local demand, timely supply and reasonable cost
Self-sufficiency and self-reliance of the village
Increasing the seed replacement rate
This allows seed to be available at the door steps of farms at an appropriate time and at an affordable cost. It also facilitates fast spread of new cultivars of different kinds.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to inflation in India, which of the following statements is correct?

- (a) Controlling the inflation in India is the responsibility of the Government of India only
- (b) The Reserve Bank of India has no role in controlling the inflation
- (c) Decreased money circulation helps in controlling the inflation
- (d) Increased money circulation helps in controlling the inflation
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Inflation Measures to Combat Inflation
Inflation is the rise in prices of goods and services within a particular economy wherein, the purchasing power of consumers decreases, and the value of the cash holdings erode.
Additional Information:

Reserve Bank of India is the authority to control inflation through monetary policies which it does by increasing bank rates, repo rates, cash reserve ratio, buying dollars, regulating money supply and availability of
Controlling Inflation: Decreased money circulation helps in controlling the Inflation.
Causes that Lead to Inflation are: Increase in demand, reduction in supply, demand- supply gap, excess circulation of money, increase in input costs, devaluation of currency, rise in wages among others.




Monetary Policy Measures
Fiscal Policy Measures
Other Measures


•   Increase of the Bank rate.
•   Reduces the private spending by increasing taxes
•   Price control by government as a short -term measure


•   Make      borrowing       costly by increasing interest rates.
•   Reduces the government spending
•   Import controls imposed by the government.


•   Increasing tendency to save
•   Bringing more people under tax coverage
•   Restricting the wage increase by companies


•   Controlling the credit-creation
•   Introducing new taxes and cess



•   Conducting open market operations
•   Increasing the Repo Rate, Bank Rate, CRR, SLR and other policy rates.





 




NOTE: This is absolutely a straightforward and easy question. Anyone with a thorough reading of NCERTs and Ramesh Singh could easily answer this question.**

---

### Question 7

‘Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana’ has been launched for:

- (a) Providing housing loans to poor people at cheaper interest rates.
- (b) Promoting women’s Self-help Groups in backward areas.
- (c) Promoting financial inclusion in the country.
- (d) Providing financial help to the marginalized communities.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Government Policies
Financial Inclusion & Access to financial products & services are one of the key objectives of PMJDY Scheme.**

---

### Question 8

When the Reserve Bank of India reduces the Statutory Liquidity Ratio by 50 basis points, which of the following is likely to happen?

- (a) India’s GDP growth rate increases drastically
- (b) Foreign Institutional Investors may bring more capital into our country
- (c) Scheduled Commercial Banks may cut their lending rates
- (d) It may drastically reduce the liquidity to the banking system
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Monetary Policy Tools
The Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) cut by the RBI is likely to give more room for banks to cut rates. Scheduled Commercial Banks may cut their lending rates.
The portion of deposits that banks must hold in the form of gold or government securities before extending credit to consumers is known as the SLR.**

---

### Question 9

‘Basel III Accord’ or simply ‘Basel III’ often seen in the new, seeks to:

- (a) Develop national strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity
- (b) Improve banking sector’s ability to deal with financial and economic stress and improve risk management
- (c) Reduce the greenhouse gas emissions but places a heavier burden on developed countries
- (d) Transfer technology from developed countries to poor countries to enable them to replace the use of chlorofluorocarbons in refrigeration with harmless chemicals
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: BASEL III Norms
BASEL-III NORMS

The Basel Accords are 3 series of banking regulations (Basel I, II, and III) set by the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision (BCBS).
Basel Accords  aim  to  strengthen the regulation, supervision and risk management of banks.
Presently the Indian banking system follows Basel II norms.
Under Basel III, a bank’s tier-1 and tier-2 assets must be at least 10.5% of its risk – weighted assets.




 
 
Tier-1

• It is the primary funding source of the bank.
• Tier-1 capital consists of shareholders’ equity and retained earnings.



 
 
 
 
 
Tier-2

• Tier-2 capital includes revaluation reserves, hybrid capital instruments and subordinated term debt, general loan – loss reserves, and undisclosed reserves.
• Tier-2 capital is considered less reliable than Tier 1 capital because it is more difficult to accurately calculate and more difficult to liquidate**

---

### Question 10

With reference to Indian economy, consider the following:

Bank rate
Open market operations
Public debt
Public Revenue

Which of the above is/are component/components of Monetary Policy?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4
- (c) 1 and 2
- (d) 1, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: RBI Monetary Policy
The monetary policy tool is implemented by the RBI through open market operations, bank rate, CRR, SLR, the repo rate, reverse repo rate. Statement 1 is correct: The bank rate is the rate of interest at which RBI charges while lending loans to a commercial bank.
Statement 2 is correct: The Open market operations are conducted by the RBI by way of sale and purchase of Government Securities (G-Secs) to adjust liquidity in the market.
Statements 3 and 4 are incorrect: Public Revenue and debt are not part of monetary policy. These are related to fiscal policy.**

---

### Question 11

With reference to the Fourteenth Finance Commission, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. It has increased the share of States in the central divisible pool from 32 percent to 42 percent.

2. It has made recommendations concerning sector- specific grants.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Finance Commission
Statement 1 is correct: The Fourteenth Finance Commission has radically enhanced the share of the states in the central divisible pool from the current 32% to 42% which is the biggest ever increase in vertical tax devolution.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The Fourteenth Finance Commission has not made any recommendation concerning sector specific grants unlike the Thirteenth Finance Commission.




Finance Commission



Constitutional Provision
Article 280, Part-XII


Appointment
By PRESIDENTIAL order.


 
Composition
Chairman + 4 other members.


 
Qualification
Determined by PARLIAMENT


 
Tenure
Constituted by the president of India every fifth year or at such earlier time as he considers necessary.


 
 
Other Facts
•   Recommendations are advisory in nature.
•   Balancing wheel of fiscal federalism.



 



15th Finance Commission


Chairman
•   N.K. Singh


 
Key Recommendations
 
Vertical Devolution:

The share of states in the centre’s taxes is recom-mended to be decreased to 41%.
1%  less   than   14th commission  (42%), that 1% is to provide for the newly formed Union Territories of J&K and  Ladakh  from  the resources of the central government.

Horizontal Devolution:

The  criteria  and  the weights assigned   for horizontal    devolution are:

Population – 15%
Area – 15%
Forest & Ecology – 10%
Income Distance – 45%
Tax and Fiscal Efforts – 2.5%
Demographic
Performance – 12.5%






•   Recommendation  to create  a  non-lapsable pool  for  the  defence and  internal security sector under the Public Accounts of India.**

---

### Question 12

With reference to the Union Government, consider the following statements:

1. The Department of Revenue is responsible for the preparation of the Union Budget that is presented to the Parliament.

2. No amount can be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India without the authorization from the Parliament of India.

3. All the disbursements made from Public Account also need the authorization from the Parliament of India.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Public Finance
Statement 1 is incorrect: The budget is prepared by the Department of Economic Affairs.
Statement 2 is correct: Consolidated Fund of India (Article 266) is a fund to which all receipts are credited and all payments are debited. No money out of this fund can be appropriated (issued or drawn) except in accordance with parliamentary law.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Provident fund deposits, savings bank deposits, remittances etc are credited to the Public Account. The Public Account is operated by the executive action i.e. payment from this account can be made without Parliamentary appropriation.
Annual Financial Statement (Budget): Article 112

The term ‘Budget’ is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution.
Budget is referred to as the Annual Financial Statement in the constitution under Art. 112.
The Budget is a statement of the Government estimated receipts and expenditure in a financial year starting from APRIL 1 and ending on 31 MARCH.
Contains Appropriation Bill (Expenditure Side) and Finance Bill (Receipts).
Revenue Account: Receipts and expenditure that relate to the current financial year only (revenue budget)
Capital Account: Concern with the assets and liabilities of the government (capital budget).
On the Acworth Committee’s recommenda-tion, the Rail Budget was separated from the General Budget in However, it was merged again in 2017.
Some recent reforms related to budget:

Budget is preponed to 1st FEB
Railway budget merged with general budget
No vote on account
Plan and non-plan expenditure removed.


Presented in terms of:

Consolidated Fund of India,
Contingency Fund of India
Public Account of India**

---

### Question 13

A decrease in tax to GDP ratio of a country indicates which of the following?

Slowing economic growth rate Less equitable distribution of national income

Select the correct answer using the codes given

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Economic Growth
Statement 1 is correct: A lower tax-to-GDP ratio puts pressure on the government to meet its fiscal deficit Targets.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Tax-GDP ratio does not indicate the distribution of national income in the economy.
Tax to GDP Ratio:

A tax-to-GDP ratio is a gauge of a nation’s tax revenue relative to the size of its economy as measured by gross domestic product (GDP).
The tax-to-GDP ratio is a measure of a nation’s tax revenue relative to the size of its economy. It determines how well a nation’s government uses its economic resources via
The tax to GDP ration is often higher in developed countries than in developing countries. A low tax to GDP ratio indicates sluggish economic The ratio represents that the government can finance its expenditure.
An economy’s tax buoyancy is robust if the tax to GDP ratio is higher. With a lower tax-to-GDP ratio, the government is under more pressure to stick to its budget deficit**

---

### Question 14

With reference to Indian economy, consider the following statements:

1. The rate of growth of Real Gross Domestic Product has steadily increased in the last decade.

2. The Gross Domestic Product at market prices (in rupees) has steadily increased in the last decade.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Economic Growth
Statement 1 is incorrect: Real Gross Domestic Product is an inflation-adjusted measure that reflects the value of all goods and services produced by an economy in a given year (expressed in base-year prices). Real GDP makes comparing GDP from year to year and from different years more meaningful because it shows comparisons for both the quantity and value of goods and services. Rate of growth of Real Gross Domestic Product has fluctuated a lot during the last decade and decreased significantly in 2008-09 due to the global financial crisis.
Statement 2 is correct: Gross domestic product at market prices is the sum of added values of all activities which produce goods and services, plus taxes and minus subsidies on products. Its objective is to determine the total wealth generated by both private and public agents in a nation’s territory over a specific time frame. The most important component of national accounts, it shows the outcome of productive activity carried out by local producing units. Gross Domestic Product at market prices (in rupees) has increased and did not show a declining trend even once during the last decade as clearly seen from the planning commission data.




NOTE: India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted by 7.3% in 2020-21. However, between the early 1990s until the pandemic hit the country, India grew at an average of around 7% every year. The question was asked in 2015 and hence, the explanation is provided accordingly.**

---

### Question 15

There has been a persistent deficit budget year after year. Which of the following actions can be taken by the government to reduce the deficit?

Reducing revenue expenditure
Introducing new welfare schemes
Rationalising subsidies
Expanding industries

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Public Finance
Statement 1 is correct: Budget deficit is used to define a status of financial health in which expenditures exceed revenue. Revenue Expenditure is the part of government spending that does not result in the production of assets. Example: Salaries, wages, pensions, subsidies, and interest payments etc. The government incurs revenue expenses to meet its operating demands. Reducing the revenue expenditure will certainly help in bridging the gap.
Statement 3 is correct: Subsidies are a part of expenditure and rationalizing them would reduce the deficit.
Statements 2 and 4 are incorrect: Introducing new welfare schemes will most likely result in increasing expenditure and so will expanding industries which would require capital infusion.**

---

### Question 16

Convertibility of rupee implies:

- (a) being able to convert rupee notes into gold.
- (b) allowing the value of rupee to be fixed by market forces.
- (c) freely permitting the conversion of rupee to other currencies and vice versa.
- (d) developing an international market for currencies in India.
Explanation


**Ans: c         
Sub-Theme: Currency Convertibility
Currency convertibility is the ease with which the currency of a country can be freely converted into any other foreign currency or gold at market determined exchange rate. It refers to the ability of rupees to be converted into any foreign currency backed with the exchange rate that prevails at the time of conversion. It allows for easy financial transactions for the export and import of goods and services.**

---

### Question 17

The problem of international liquidity is related to the nonavailability of:

- (a) Goods and services
- (b) Gold and silver
- (c) Dollars and other hard currencies
- (d) Exportable surplus
Explanation


**Ans: c          
Sub-Theme: Basic Economic Concepts
International payments resulting from trade in goods and services are linked to the idea of international liquidity. International liquidity consists of all the resources that are available to the monetary authorities of countries for the purpose of meeting balance of payments deficits. Such liquidity ranges from assets readily available to resources that become available only after extensive negotiation. Gold and those foreign currencies that are accepted everywhere for the settlement of international transactions are the main sources of international liquidity. This problem of international liquidity exists essentially for developing countries.**

---

### Question 18

In the ‘Index of Eight Core Industries’, which one of the following is given the highest weight?

- (a) Coal production
- (b) Electricity generation
- (c) Fertiliser production
- (d) Steel production
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Index of Industrial Production

Index of Industrial Production (IIP):

It details the growth of various sectors in an economy such as mining, electricity and manufacturing.
The all India IIP is a composite indicator that measures the short-term changes in the volume of production of a basket of industrial products during a given period with respect to that in a chosen base period.
It is compiled and published monthly by the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) six weeks after the reference month ends.


Eight Core Sectors:

Comprising 40.27% of the weight of items included in the Index of Industrial Production (IIP).
The eight core sector industries in decreasing order of their weightage:



Refinery Products > Electricity > Steel
> Coal > Crude Oil > Natural Gas > Cement > Fertilisers.**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

The provisions in the Fifth Schedule and Sixth Schedule in the Constitution of India are made in order to:

- (a) protect the interests of Scheduled Tribes
- (b) determine the boundaries between States
- (c) determine the powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats
- (d) protect the interests of all the border States
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Articles and Schedules of Indian Constitution
The fifth and the sixth schedule of the Constitution of India deals with the provisions related to the protection of the interests of the Scheduled Tribes.

Fifth Schedule: Deals with the provisions relating to the administration and control of scheduled areas and scheduled tribes in any state except 4 states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura & Mizoram (AMTM).
Article 244 (1) of the Constitution defines Scheduled Areas as the areas defined so by the President of India and are mentioned in the 5th schedule of the Constitution.
Sixth Schedule: It deals with the provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in 4 NE states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura & Mizoram (Not Manipur).**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements regarding the Directive Principles of State Policy:

1. The principles spell out of the socio-economic democracy in the country.

2. The provisions contained in these Principles are not enforceable by any court.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Features of the Directive Principles

Statement 1 is correct: The Directive Principles deals with a very comprehensive economic, social and political programme for a modern democratic State. They aim at realising the high ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity as outlined in the Preamble to the Constitution.

Article 38: Deals with the promotion of the welfare of the people by securing and protecting a social order by ensuring social, economic and political justice and by minimising inequalities in income, status, facilities and opportunities.
R. Ambedkar opined that the Directives have great value because they lay down that the goal of Indian polity is ‘economic democracy’ as distinguished from ‘political democracy’.


Statement 2 is correct: According to Article 37 Directive Principles are not enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country.**

---

### Question 3

The ideal of ‘Welfare State’ in the Indian Constitution is enshrined in its

- (a) Preamble
- (b) Directive Principles of State Policy
- (c) Fundamental Rights
- (d) Seventh Schedule
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Features of the Directive Principles



The Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) are mentioned under Articles 36 to 51 of the Indian Constitution.
The DPSPs have been borrowed from the Constitution of Ireland. It constitutes a comprehensive socio economic and political programme for a modern democratic State. DPSP embodies the concept of a ‘welfare state’ and not that of a ‘police state’.
Article 38 (1): The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.



Additional Information:

Fundamental Rights: It is the basic human rights enshrined in Article 12 -35 of Part III of Indian They are enforceable by the courts, subject to certain conditions.
Preamble: It is the ideals and philosophy of the The Preamble gives an idea about the following:

 Source of the constitution
Nature of Indian state
Statement of its objectives
Date of its adoption


Seventh Schedule: The seventh schedule under Article 246 in Part XI of the Constitution deals with the division of powers between the union and the states. It contains three lists- Union List, State List and Concurrent List.**

---

### Question 4

“To uphold and protect the Sovereignty, Unity and Integrity of India” is a provision made in the:

- (a) Preamble of the Constitution
- (b) Directive Principles of State Policy
- (c) Fundamental Rights
- (d) Fundamental Duties
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: List of Fundamental Duties

Article 51A of part IV-A of the Indian Constitution deals with the Fundamental Duties. These duties are the moral and civic obligations that all citizens of a nation
In 1976, the Fundamental Duties were first recommended by the Swaran Singh Committee, its need was felt during the internal emergency (1975-77) and were added to the Constitution by 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1976.
One of the Fundamental Duties is to “To protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India” among the 11 Fundamental**

---

### Question 5

There is a Parliamentary System of Government in India because the

- (a) Lok Sabha is elected directly by the people
- (b) Parliament can amend the Constitution
- (c) Rajya Sabha cannot be dissolved
- (d) Council of Ministers is responsible to the Lok Sabha
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Parliamentary System of Government
India has a parliamentary system of government. The Union Parliament is the supreme legislative body in the country and in a Parliamentary system, the executive is responsible for Parliament. In India, this system is applicable to both Union and State level. The Prime Minister and his Council of Ministers (CoM) are responsible to the Lok Sabha. This is called Collective Responsibility, which is considered as the bedrock of Parliamentary Government. Article 75 of the Constitution of India states that CoM is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. The Lok Sabha can remove CoM by passing no confidence motion.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following statements:

1. The Executive Power of the Union of India is vested in the Prime Minister.

2.The Prime Minister is the ex Officio Chairman of the Civil Services Board.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Powers of President/Executives
Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Article 53(1), the executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The Cabinet Secretary is the top-most executive official and senior-most civil servant of the Government of India and he/she is the ex-officio head of the Civil Services Board.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following statements:

1. The Rajya Sabha has no power either to reject or to amend a Money Bill.

2. The Rajya Sabha cannot vote on the Demands for grants.

3. The Rajya Sabha cannot discuss the Annual Financial Statement.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Annual Financial Statement / Money Bill

Statement 1 is correct: The Rajya Sabha can keep the Money Bill for a maximum period of 14 days. The house cannot amend or reject the Money Bill, it should return the bill with or without recommendation to Lok Sabha, after that Lok Sabha may accept or reject recommendation.
Statement 2 is correct: The Rajya Sabha has no power to vote on the demand for grants; it is the exclusive privilege of the Lok Sabha.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Rajya Sabha enjoys equal status with the Lok Sabha on the matter of discussion of Annual Financial Statement.




NOTE: In previous years, many questions have been asked on Money bill, Annual Financial Statement and role of Rajya Sabha and President in this regard. These are highly important topics.**

---

### Question 8

When a bill is referred to a joint sitting of both the Houses of the Parliament, it has to be passed by

- (a) a simple majority of members present and voting
- (b) three-fourths majority of members present and voting
- (c) two-thirds majority of the Houses
- (d) absolute majority of the Houses
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Joint Session of Parliament
Joint sitting (Article 108) of two house:

It is extraordinary machinery provided by the Constitution to resolve a deadlock between the two Houses over the passage of a bill –

If the bill is rejected by the other
If the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the bill; or
If more than six months have elapsed from the date of the receipt of the bill by the other House without the bill being passed by it.


Summon: The president can summon joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the bill.**

---

### Question 9

Who/Which of the following is the custodian of the Constitution of India?

- (a) The President of India
- (b) The Prime Minister of India
- (c) The Lok Sabha Secretariat
- (d) The Supreme Court of India
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Interpretation of Constitution The Supreme Court as the Custodian of the Indian Constitution:

Indian Judiciary is an integrated, powerful and independent judiciary.
The Legislature and Executive works on making laws and implementation of the laws, but the Judiciary works on safeguarding the public interest by checking into overreach, misuse and error of law.
Therefore, the authority to amend the constitution lies with the Parliament, but the SC has the authority to examine the validity of those amendments.
SC has the power of Judicial
According to Article 32, the SC is the guardian of Fundamental Rights.
The SC also an interpreter and Guardian of the Constitution.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following statements:

1. The Legislative Council of a State in India can be larger in size than half of the Legislative Assembly of that particular State.

2. The Governor of a State nominates the Chairman of the Legislative Council of that particular State.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Composition of Legislative Assembly/Legislative Council
Statement 1 is incorrect: As per Article 171, the maximum strength of the Legislative Council of the state cannot be more than one third of total strength of assembly. However, the size of the Legislative Council cannot be less than 40 members. The constitution has fixed the maximum and minimum limits but actual strength is fixed by Parliament.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The members of the Legislative Council are indirectly elected. The Chairman of the Legislative Council is elected by the members from amongst itself.**

---

### Question 11

The fundamental object of the Panchayati Raj system is to ensure which among the following?

1. People’s participation in development

2. Political accountability

3. Democratic decentralisation

4. Financial mobilisation

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 4 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Objective of Local Governance

Statements 1 and 3 are correct: The main idea behind the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) is to promote grass root democracy and development. The main aim is to evolve a system of democratic decentralisation and people’s participation with a view to ensure rapid socio-economic progress and provide adequate justice.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Political accountability can be achieved in any system with democratic rule.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Financial mobilisation was never the basis for the establishment of PRI.




NOTE: In this question, the catch word is “Fundamental object”. We must stress on this phrase and apply this litmus test to each given sentence. Political accountability is never a Fundamental objective of the Panchayati Raj system. Moreover, People’s participation in development and Democratic decentralisation are correlative to each other. Financial mobilisation is meant for financial autonomy of PRI, but not a fundamental objective.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

Who of the following was/were economic critic/ critics of colonialism in India?

Dadabhai Naoroji
Subramania Iyer
C. Dutt

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Economic Exploitation of the British/Economic critics of colonialism
Dadbhai Naoroji, Subramania Iyer and R.C. Dutt are considered as the economic critics of colonialism in India.
Nationalists Critique Of Colonial Economy:

The early nationalist of India analysed the colonial character of British rule in India in great detail. The economic critique produced by them was one of the remarkable achievements of the moderate nationalists.
Dadabhai Naoroji (Grand Old man of India): “Poverty and UnBritish Rule in India” – Propounded Drain of Wealth Uncovered the economic exploitation of India by the British.
Romesh Chandra Dutta: “The Economic History of India” – Half of the annual GDP of India outflowed every year.
 V. Joshi: Pointed out that the development in India was like a subsidy to the British Industries.
Other Critiques: Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade, G. Subramaniam Iyer, G.K. Gokhale etc. examined every facet of the economy and subjected the entire range of economic issues and colonial economic policies to minute scrutiny.




NOTE: This question can be made correct by reading Modern NCERT. It’s always recommended reading between the lines about every personality.**

---

### Question 2

The Government of India Act of 1919 clearly defined:

- (a) The separation of power between the judiciary and the legislature
- (b) The jurisdiction of the central and provincial governments
- (c) The powers of the Secretary of State for India and the Viceroy
- (d) None of the above
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Administrative Reforms post 1857 The Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms which became the Government of India Act in 1919, defined the jurisdiction of the central and provincial governments.

The GoI Act 1919 introduced a diarchy (rule of two individuals/parties) for the executive at the level of the provincial
The diarchy was implemented in eight provinces: Assam, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Central Provinces, United Provinces, Bombay, Madras and Punjab.
The Dyarchy system increased the authority of the provincial governments.
In the province, the governor was to serve as the chief executive.

Introduction to Diarchy:

The GoI Act 1919 introduced a diarchy (rule of two individuals/parties) for the executive at the level of the provincial government.
The diarchy was implemented in eight provinces: Assam, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Central Provinces, United Provinces, Bombay, Madras and Punjab.
The Dyarchy system increased the authority of the provincial governments.
In the province, the governor was to serve as the chief executive.

Division of Subjects:

Division of subjects into two lists: ‘reserved’ and ‘transferred’.
The reserved list: included subjects such as law and order, finance, land revenue, irrigation and the subjects were to be administered by the governor through his executive council of bureaucrats. All significant subjects were maintained in the Provincial Executive’s reserved subjects.
The transferred subjects: were to be administered by ministers nominated from among the elected members of the legislative council and it included subjects such as education, health, local government, industry, agriculture, excise, etc.**

---

### Question 3

Which one of the following movements has contributed to a split in the Indian National Congress resulting in the emergence of ‘moderates’ and ‘extremists’?

- (a) Swadeshi Movement
- (b) Quit India Movement
- (c) Non-Cooperation Movement
- (d) Civil Disobedience Movement
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Swadeshi Movement
Swadeshi and Boycott Movements:

It was launched due to the partition of Later, the movement spread to other regions of the nation:

Poona and Bombay: Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Punjab: Lala Lajpat Rai, Ajit Singh
Delhi: Syed Haider Raza
Madras: Chidambaram Pillai


The Swadeshi Movement contributed to a split in the Indian National Congress in 1907, resulting in the emergence of ‘moderates’ and ‘extremists’.
Congress Session 1907, Surat, presided by Rash Behari Ghosh was known as Surat split.
Extremists wanted either G. Tilak or Lajpat Rai as President.
Moderates proposed Rashbehari Ghosh and wanted the session to be in Surat in order to exclude Tilak from the presidency.
Since a leader from the host province could not be session president, they also sought to drop resolutions on swadeshi, boycott and national education.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to Rowlatt Satyagraha, which of the following statements is/are correct ?

The Rowlatt Act was based on the recommendations of the ‘Sedition Committee’.
In Rowlatt Satyagraha, Gandhiji tried to utilise the Home Rule League.
Demonstrations against the arrival of the Simon Commission coincided with Rowlatt Satyagraha.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Phase of Mahatma Gandhi
Statement 1 is correct: Rowlatt Act was passed on the recommendations of the Sedition Committee chaired by Sir Sidney Rowlatt.
Statement 2 is correct: In organising his satyagraha, Gandhiji tried to utilise three types of political networks: The Home Rule Leagues; Certain Pan-Islamist groups and Satyagraha Sabha.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The two time periods are not the same. It has a gap of 9 years, the incident of Rowlatt Satyagraha took place in 1919 and the Demonstrations against the arrival of Simon Commission took place in 1928, thus the two events cannot coincide.
 



NOTE: Question on Rowlatt act came in 2012 as well. Moreover, the Rowlatt Satyagraha took place in 1919 and the Simon Commission in 1928. So the possibility of coincidence of Simon Commission with Rowlatt Satyagraha stands null. Point to note here is that the relative idea of timeline and corresponding events is very important. This helps us to solve or eliminate statements.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to Congress Socialist Party, consider the following statements:

It advocated the boycott of British goods and evasion of taxes.
It wanted to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat.
It advocated separate electorate for minorities and oppressed classes.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Congress Socialist Party
Statement 1 is incorrect: On May 17, 1934, at Patna, with Acharya Narendra Dev as president and Jayaprakash Narayan (JP) as general secretary, the Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was founded within the Congress. The CSP advocated decentralised socialism in which co-operatives, trade unions, independent farmers, and local authorities would hold a substantial share of the economic power. It did not advocate.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Their focus was to attain independence and believed in socialism through nationalism. The CSP promoted a decentralised socialist system in which local authorities, cooperatives, trade unions, and independent farmers would control a sizable portion of the economic power. Hence, it did not aim to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Statement 3 is incorrect: As secularists, they hoped to transcend communal divisions through class solidarity. Many people, like Narendra Deva and Basawon Singh (Sinha), favoured a democratic socialism that was separate from both reformist social democracy and Marxism.**

---

### Question 6

Who of the following organised a march on the Tanjore coast to break the Salt Law in April 1930?

- (a) O. Chidambaram Pillai
- (b) Rajagopalachari
- (c) Kamaraj
- (d) Annie Besant
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Phases of Mahatma Gandhi/ SatyagrahaMovements/Salt Satyagraha
Civil Disobedience Movement – The Salt Satyagraha and other upsurges:
Dandi March (March 12- April 6, 1930):

The Dandi march was led by Gandhi and began at Sabarmati Ashram and ended close to the Dandi village’s coastal location; it was also known as Salt Satyagraha.
He reached Dandi on April 6, 1930, and broke the salt law by collecting salt from the beach.

Satyagraha at Different Places:

Tamil Nadu: C Rajagopalachari organised a march from Tiruchirapalli to Vedaranniyam on Tanjore coast.
Malabar: K. Kelappan known for Vailkom Satyagraha organised salt marches.
Orissa: Gopal  Bandhu  Chaudhuri organised in Balasore, Cuttack etc.
Bihar: Non chowkidari tax was
Peshawar: Badshah khan/khan Abdul Gaffar Khan(Frontier Gandhi) who organised Khudaikhidmatgars (red shirts) organised a powerful march.
Dharasana: Sarojini Naidu led the
Nagaland: Rani Gaidinliu at the age of 13 years raised the banner against the British**

---

### Question 7

With reference to the Cabinet Mission, which of the following statements is/are correct?

It recommended a federal government.
It enlarged the powers of the Indian courts.
It provided for more Indians in the ICS.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) None of these
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Cabinet Mission
Statement 1 is correct: On 22nd January 1946, the decision to send Cabinet Mission was taken and on 19th February 1946, the British PM C.R Attlee Government announced in the House of Lords about the mission and the plan to quit India. A high-powered mission of three British Cabinet members- Lord Pethick-Lawrence(the Secretary of State for India), Sir Stafford Cripps (President of the Board of Trade) and A. V. Alexander(the First Lord of the Admiralty) reached Delhi on 24th March 1946. All subjects other than Union subjects and residuary power would vest in the provinces of British India. Thus, the Cabinet Mission plan proposed a weak Centre with Provincial autonomy, essentially proposing a federal structure of government.
Statements 2 and 3 are incorrect: The plan did not include the enlargement of the powers of the Indian Court nor provided for more Indians in the ICS.
Objective of the Cabinet Mission:

To resolve political deadlock between the Indian National Congress and the All-India Muslim League.
The Congress party wanted to obtain a strong central government with more powers as compared to state governments.
All India Muslim League under Jinnah wanted to keep India united but with political safeguards provided to Muslims such as ‘guarantee’ of ‘parity’ in the legislatures.
On 16 May 1946, this plan was announced and preceded by the Shimla Conference of
Recommendation:

The unity of India had to be retained
It proposed a very loose union of all the Indian territories under a centre that would control merely defence, the Foreign Affairs and the Communication. The Union would have the powers necessary to raise the finances to manage these subjects.
All subjects other than Union subjects and residuary power would vest in the provinces of British India. Thus, the Cabinet Mission plan proposed a weak Centre with Provincial autonomy, essentially proposing a federal structure of government.
The Princely Legislatures would then elect a Constituent Assembly or a Constitution making body with each province being allotted a specified number of seats proportionate to its population.
The proposed Constituent Assembly was to consist of 292 members from British India and 93 from Indian States.
The Mission proposed an immediate formation of Interim Government at the centre, enjoying the support of major political parties and with the Indians holding all the portfolios.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following statements:

The first woman President of the Indian National Congress was Sarojini Naidu.
The first Muslim President of the Indian National Congress was Badruddin Tyabji.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b        
 Sub-Theme: Important Personalities/ Important sessions of INC
Statement 1 is incorrect: The first woman President of the Indian National Congress was Annie Besant in the 1917 Calcutta Session. Sarojini Naidu became the first Indian woman President of INC in 1925 Kanpur Session.
Statement 2 is correct: Badruddin Tyabji became the first Muslim President of the Indian National Congress in the 1887 Madras Session.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

With reference to ‘Near Field Communication (NFC) Technology’, which of the following statements is/ are correct?

It is a contactless communication technology that uses electromagnetic radio fields.
NFC is designed for use by devices which can be at a distance of even a metre from each other.
NFC can use encryption when sending sensitive

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Communication Technology

Near Field Communication (NFC) is a contactless communication technology based on a radio frequency (RF) field using a base frequency of 13.56 MHz. NFC technology is designed to exchange data between two devices simply through a touch gesture.
In comparison to other wireless technologies, which have a working distance of several metres, NFC technology is designed for an operation distance of a few centimetres, making it more challenging for attackers to record the communication between an NFC Forum Device and an NFC Forum Tag.
Additionally, the NFC Forum Device user chooses through a touch gesture with which entity the NFC connection should occur, making it more challenging for the attacker to connect.
As a result, compared to other wireless communication protocols, the security level of NFC communication is by design higher.
Statement 1 is correct: NFC technology is perfectly designed to exchange data between two devices through a simple touch gesture.
Statement 2 is incorrect: NFC technology is designed for an operation distance of a few centimeters, this makes it more difficult for attackers to record the communication between an NFC Forum Device and an NFC Forum Tag compared to other wireless technologies which have a working distance of several meters.
Statement 3 is correct: The security level of the NFC communication is by default higher compared to other wireless communication protocols.**

---

### Question 2

With reference to the use of nanotechnology in the health sector, which of the following statements is/are correct?

Targeted drug delivery is made possible by nanotechnology.
Nanotechnology can largely contribute to gene therapy.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Nanotechnology

Nanotechnology deals with the understanding and controlling of matter at level of 1 and 100 nanometers, where unique phenomena enable novel
Targeted drug distribution by nanoscale drug carriers is one of the fundamental tenets of nanomedicine. Numerous nanoscale drug delivery technologies, such as liposomes, dendrimers, quantum dots, nanotubes, polymeric biodegradable nanoparticles, and nanocapsules, have been studied.
In addition to enabling new therapeutic classes and encouraging the re-investigation of previously unfeasible new molecular entities that are pharmaceutically suboptimal but   biologically active, nanoscale delivery vehicles can improve the therapeutic efficacy and minimise side effects associated with existing medications.
The development of medical nanotechnology can significantly advance genetic treatment. If diseases are handled from a genetic perspective, they are simple to treat. Therefore, using nanotechnology will enable medical professionals to treat illnesses by focusing on their fundamental causes rather than just their symptoms.
Statement 1 is correct: One of the key aspects of nanomedicine is targeted drug delivery by nanoscale drug carriers.
Statement 2 is correct: Medical nanotechnology can largely contribute to genetic therapy and improvement.**

---

### Question 3

In the context of modern scientific research, consider the following statements about ‘IceCube’, a particle detector located at South Pole, which was recently in the news:
1. It is the world’s largest neutrino detector, encompassing a cubic kilometer of ice.
2. It is a powerful telescope to search for dark matter.
3. It is buried deep in the ice.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Space observatory

The Ice Cube Neutrino Observatory is the first detector of this type, designed for observing the cosmos from deep within the South Pole ice. An international group of scientists responsible for the scientific research makes up the IceCube Collaboration.
The most violent astrophysical sources, including as stellar explosions, gamma- ray bursts, and catastrophic occurrences involving black holes and neutron stars, can all be studied using the information provided by these high-energy cosmic
Statement 1 is correct: With a cubic kilometre of ice in its footprint, Ice Cube is the largest neutrino detector ever built. It is buried up to a depth of 2.5 km.
Statement 2 is correct: The Ice Cube telescope is an effective tool for looking for dark matter and may shed light on the physics mechanisms underlying the mysterious origin of the highest energy particles in nature.
Statement 3 is correct: Ice Cube, which encompasses a cubic kilometre of ice, looks for neutrinos, which are nearly massless subatomic particles.**

---

### Question 4

The term ‘Goldilocks Zone’ is often seen in the news in the context of

- (a) The limits of habitable zone above the surface of the Earth
- (b) Regions inside the Earth where shale gas is available
- (c) Search for the Earth-like planets in outer space
- (d) Search for meteorites containing precious metals
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Space Science
The Correct answer is Option (c):

The Goldilocks Zone is the habitable zone around a star where the temperature is optimum – not too hot and not too cold – for liquid water to exist on a planet.
It is a metaphor of the children’s story “Goldilocks and the Three Bears,” in which a young girl selects from sets of three objects, eschewing the extremes (such as those that are enormous or small, hot or cold, ), and deciding on the one that is “just right” in the middle.
The Goldilocks zone of the Sun surrounds the Earth. All of Earth’s water would freeze if it were located where the dwarf planet Pluto is; however, all of Earth’s water would boil out if it were located where Mercury
Water is a fundamental component for life as we know it and is where life first began on Earth. So any rocky exoplanet in the habitable zone will be considered by researchers as they look for evidence of alien life.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to ‘fly ash’ produced by the power plants using coal as fuel, which of the following statements is/are correct?

Fly ash can be used in the production of bricks for building construction.
Fly ash can be used as a replacement for some of the Portland cement contents of concrete.
Fly ash is made up of silicon dioxide and calcium oxide only, and does not contain any toxic

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Environmental Chemistry
About Fly Ash:

Fly ash is a fine grey powder that consists mostly of spherical, glassy particles that are produced as a byproduct in coal-fired power
Pozzolanic characteristics in fly ash allow it to interact with lime to produce cementitious compounds. It is frequently referred to as an additional cementitious
Fly ash is a by product of combustion that is made up of the small particles that rise with the flue gases. Bottom ash is ash that does not Fly ash is typically used in an industrial setting to describe the ash created during coal burning.
The main chemical components present in fly ash are:

Silicon dioxide
Aluminium oxide
Ferric oxide
Calcium oxide (occasionally) (Statement 3 is incorrect)


Fly ash particle condenses while suspended in exhaust gases, and electrostatic precipitators or filter bags are used to remove it. Fly ash particles are typically spherical in shape and range in size from 0.5 µm to 300 µm because they harden quickly when suspended in the exhaust fumes.
Fly ash has numerous advantages in both cement and non-cement applications and considerably enhances the performance of concrete. Additionally, fly ash looks to work well as a catalyst for the high-temperature pyrolysis process, which transforms polyethylene into a material akin to crude oil, when treated with sodium hydroxide. (Statements 1 & 2 are correct)**

---

### Question 6

With reference to ‘fuel cells’ in which hydrogen-rich fuel and oxygen are used to generate electricity, consider the following statements:

If pure hydrogen is used as a fuel, the fuel cell emits heat and water as by-products.
Fuel cells can be used for powering buildings and not for small devices like laptop computers.
Fuel cells produce electricity in the form of Alternating Current (AC).

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Non-Conventional Energy/ Renewable Energy
Statement 1 is correct: A fuel cell generates electricity in a clean and effective manner using the chemical energy of hydrogen or other fuels. Electricity, water, and heat are the only by products if hydrogen is the fuel.
Statement 2 is incorrect: In terms of the diversity of potential applications, fuel cells are exceptional; they can run on a variety of fuels and feedstocks and can power devices as big as utility power plants and as tiny as laptop computers.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Fuel cells produce electricity in the form of direct current (DC). Electrons can only move in one direction in a DC circuit. Alternating current (AC), which circulates in both directions on alternating cycles, provides the electricity in our homes and workplaces.**

---

---

