# UPSC Prelims 2016 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

In the context of the history of India, consider the following pairs:

Term
Description


1. Eripatti
Land revenue which was set apart for the maintenance of the village tank


2. Taniyurs
Villages     donated      to     single Brahmin or a group of Brahmins


3. Ghatikas
Colleges generally attached to the temples

Which of the pairs given above is correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3
- (d) 1 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Terminologies based on ancient India
The Correct answer is Option (d): Eripatti was a special kind of land donated by individuals, revenue from which was set apart for the maintenance of tanks in the village. Generous donations were given to places of study like Ghatikas and Mathas.

During the Chola administration, occasionally a very large village would be administered as a single unit and this was called Taniyur.**

---

### Question 2

Who of the following had first deciphered the edicts of Emperor Ashoka?

- (a) Georg Buhler
- (b) James Prinsep
- (c) Max Muller
- (d) William Jones
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Ashoka and his inscriptions
The correct answer is Option (b): James Prinsep deciphered the edicts of Ashoka in 1837. James Prinsep, an officer in the mint of the East India Company, deciphered Brahmi and Kharosthi, two scripts used in the earliest inscriptions and coins. The most widely known are the edicts of Ashoka, which have been discovered in many parts of the country. In fact, the reconstruction of the Mauryan period to a great extent became possible only after the Brahmi script of the inscriptions at Sanchi was deciphered by James Prinsep in 1837. James Princep found that most of these mentioned a king referred to as Piyadassi – meaning “pleasant to behold”; there were a few inscriptions which also referred to the king as Asoka, one of the most famous rulers known from Buddhist texts.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the cultural history of India, the memorizing of chronicles, dynastic histories and epic tales was the profession of which of the following?

- (a) Shramana
- (b) Parivraajaka
- (c) Agrahaarika
- (d) Magadha
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Terminologies based on ancient India
The Correct answer is Option (d): About Buddhism and Jainism: Buddhism and Jainism emerged as prominent religions having a large number of followers, referred to as Sramanic religions; these two religious systems were antithetical to the mainstream Vedic religion. During its development, the term came to refer to several non-Brahmanical ascetic religions parallel to but separate from the Vedic religion. The Sramaṇa tradition includes primarily Jainism, Buddhism, and others such as the Ajivika. The Sramaṇa religions became popular in the same circles of mendicants from greater Magadha that led to the development of spiritual practices, as well as the popular concepts in all major Indian religions such as Samsara (the cycle of birth and death) and moksha (liberation from that cycle). The Sramanic traditions have a diverse range of beliefs, ranging from accepting or denying the concept of soul, fatalism to free will, idealisation of extreme asceticism to that of family life, renunciation, strict ahimsa (non- violence) and vegetarianism to permissibility of violence and meat eating.

Memorizing chronicles, dynastic histories and epic tales was the profession of different types of people, the sutas and the Magdhas, who were descendants of priest families of the Vedic period.
Shramana means seeker, one who performs acts of austerity.
Agraharika looked after the lands given in charity. Agrahara means grant given to Brahmins, it was perpetual, hereditary and tax free.
Parivrajaka means “One who roams around”. The Sanskrit word parivrajaka means renunciant & wanderer in English. Only a few parivrajakas have ever existed in history. Ajita Keshkambalin, Makhkhali Goshala, Gauthama Buddha, and Vardhamana Mahavira are a few well- known examples.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to the economic history of medieval India, the term ‘Araghatta’ refers to:

- (a) bonded labour
- (b) land grant made to military officers
- (c) waterwheel used in the irrigation of land
- (d) wasteland converted to cultivated land
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Medieval Terminology or keyword/ Economic History of Medieval India
Correct answer is Option (c): The ‘Persian Wheel’ has been referred to as Araghatta in ancient Sanskrit writings.

The term “ara-ghatta” derives from the words “ara,” which means “spoke,” and “ghatta,” which means “pot.”
There is evidence to support the theory that India was the origin of this method of drawing water from open wells.
It is referred to as the “cakka-vattakka”or the “ghati yantra” in the Panchatantra (3rd century BCE) and the Rajatarangini (12th century CE).

In the twelfth century, this term, also known as the “Araghattikka” or “arahattiyanara,” was frequently used to refer to a person or animal working the Araghatta.
The Persian wheel is a water lifting device used usually by draft animals, like bulls, buffaloes, or camels.
Baburnama provides a comprehensive explanation and a picture of the Persian Wheel which was in use in the Punjab province.
NOTE: In Our Past II, Pg 6 and 7 there is a discussion on the invention of the Persian wheel in irrigation, UPSC twisted the information and asked the question on Persian wheel. Also, do not confuse it with the ‘Agrahara system’. A ‘agrahara’ was a piece of land given to a Brahmana who was typically exempt from paying land revenue and other dues to the king and frequently granted the authority to collect these dues from the local people.**

---

### Question 5

Regarding the taxation system of Krishna Deva, the ruler of Vijayanagar, consider the following statements:

The tax rate on land was fixed depending on the quality of the land.
Private owners of workshops paid an industry tax.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Vijayanagar Economy
Statement 1 is correct: The tax rate was fixed between one-third and one-sixth depending on the quality of the land. In the reign of Krishna Deva, land revenue was the main source of income of the government. The government also assessed other taxes, such as the grazing tax, customs duty, gardening tax, and industrial taxes on the production of various goods.
Statement 2 is correct: Commercial taxes consisting of levies, duties and customs on manufactured articles of trade were also levied. Private owners of workshops also paid an industry tax. In addition to the land tax, there were taxes levied on shopkeepers, farm workers, farm servants, laborers, posters, shoemakers, musicians, etc. Grazing and house taxes were also imposed.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to the cultural history of medieval India, consider the following statements:

Siddhas (Sittars) of the Tamil region were monotheistic and condemned idolatry.
Lingayats of the Kannada region questioned the theory of rebirth and rejected the caste hierarchy.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Cultural History of Medieval India

Statement 1 is correct: Siddhas condemned idolatry, they advocated renunciation of the world. To them, the path to salvation lay in meditation on the formless ultimate reality and the realisation of oneness with it.
There are 18 Siddhas who are considered as the pillars of Siddha medicine according to Tamil tradition.
There is no consensus on their exact time. The Siddhars by their spiritual and yogic practices attained immense knowledge and experience in Vaithiyam (Medicine), Vatham (Alchemy), Jothidam (Astrology), Manthirigam (Tantric practices), Yogam (Meditation and yogic exercises) and Gnanam (Knowledge about the Almighty).
Statement 2 is correct: The Lingayats challenged the idea of caste and the “pollution” attributed to certain groups by Brahmanas. They also questioned the theory of rebirth.
The Lingayats are devotees of Basaveshwara, a poet and social reformer who lived in the 12th century.
He was against the caste system and Vedic rituals. The Lingayats adhere to absolute monotheism. They encourage worshiping only one deity, especially Linga (Shiva).
The term “Linga” refers to universal consciousness as defined by the universal energy, not to Lingas seen in temples (Shakti). Lingayats are Shaivites and have been categorized as a Hindu subcaste known as “Veerashaiva Lingayats.”**

---

### Question 7

Banjaras during the medieval period of Indian history were generally

- (a) Agriculturists
- (b) Warriors
- (c) Weavers
- (d) Trader
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Medieval Terminology/Keyword
Correct answer is Option (d): During the Indian Middle Ages, banjaras were generally
merchants. They referred to their caravans as tanda.

During the reign of Alauddin Khalji, banjaras had a significant For the purpose of transporting grain to the markets in the cities, Alauddin Khalji used the Banjaras. They were responsible for moving goods from one location to another.
According to the Emperor Jahangir’s chronicles, the Banjaras transported grain from various regions on their bullocks and sold it in towns.**

---

---

## Art Culture

### Question 1

What is/are common to the two historical places known as Ajanta and Mahabalipuram?

Both were built in the same
Both belong to the same religious
Both have rock-cut monuments.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) None of the statements given above is correct
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Ancient Architecture/Sculpture/ Ajanta Cave
Statement 1 is incorrect: Ajanta Caves are 30 rock-cut Buddhist cave monuments that date from the 2nd century BCE to 480 or 650 CE. Mahabalipuram has a group of sanctuaries, which was carved out of rock along the Coromandel coast in the 7th and 8th centuries.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Ajanta caves are mostly dedicated to Buddhist denominations while Mahabalipuram has more inclination towards the Vaishnavite sect.
Statement 3 is correct: Both Mahabalipuram and Ajanta are one of the finest examples of rock-cut monuments.




NOTE: UPSC has repeatedly asked questions from this particular topic, esp. Ajanta in 2014, 2016 and 2021. This underlines the importance of revising PYQ and related research. Question on Mahabalipuram as an option came in 2015 as well. Reading Fine Art NCERT for the art and culture section is very important. The glossary of the same book must be read and revised thoroughly.**

---

### Question 2

With reference to the religious history of India, consider the following statements:

The concept of Bodhisattva is central to the Hinayana sect of Buddhism.
Bodhisattva is a compassionate one on his way to enlightenment.
Bodhisattva delays achieving his own salvation to help all sentient beings on their path to it.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Buddhism
Statement 1 is incorrect: A Bodhisattva is literally a living being(Sattva) who aspires to attain enlightenment(Bodhi). The concept of Bodhisattva is central to the Mahayana sect of Buddhism.
Statement 2 is correct: Compassion, an empathetic sharing of the sufferings of others, is Bodhisattva’s greatest characteristic.
Statement 3 is correct: Bodhisattva delays achieving his own salvation to help others on the same path. It is held that the Bodhisattva makes four vows expressing a determination to work for the happiness of others; “ However innumerable sentient beings are, I vow to save them; however inexhaustible the passions are, I vow to master them; However limitless the teachings are, I vow to study them, However infinite The Budha-truth is, I vow to attain it.”



NOTE: UPSC loves this theme and multiple times asked questions from this particular theme. Therefore, for detailed explanation aspirants are requested to go through the earlier PYQ solution**

---

### Question 3

Which one of the following books of ancient India has the love story of the son of the founder of the Shunga dynasty?

- (a) Swapnavasavadatta
- (b) Malavikagnimitra
- (c) Meghadoota
- (d) Ratnavali
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Literary work of ancient India
Option (b) is correct: The love story of the son of the founder of the Shunga dynasty is found in the book “Malavikagnimitra”.Malavikagnimitra:

The Malavikagnimitra is a Sanskrit play byKalidas.
The play tells the love story of Agnimitra the son Of Pushyamitra Shunga- the founder of the Shunga dynasty.
He falls in love with the picture of an exiled servant girl named Malavika.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

‘Gadgil Committee Report’ and ‘Kasturirangan Committee Report’, sometimes seen in the news, are related to

- (a) constitutional reforms
- (b) Ganga Action Plan
- (c) linking of rivers
- (d) protection of Western Ghats
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Disaster Management
Option (d) is the correct answer: ‘Gadgil Committee Report’ and ‘Kasturirangan Committee Report’, are related to protection of Western Ghats.
GADGIL COMMITTEE REPORT, 2011:

Eco-sensitive areas: The Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP), chaired by Prof. Madhav Gadgil, was established by the Ministry of Environment & Forests in
Objective: It was constituted to primarily demarcate ecologically sensitive areas in the Western Ghats and recommended measures for the management of these ecologically sensitive areas.

KASTURIRANGAN COMMITTEE REPORT, 2013:

The Kasturirangan committee was constituted to examine the WGEEP report.**

---

### Question 2

Which of the following best describe/ describes the aim of the ‘Green India Mission’ of the Government of India?

1. Incorporating environmental benefits and costs into the Union and State Budgets thereby implementing the ‘green accounting’

2. Launching the second green revolution to enhance agricultural output so as to ensure food security to one and all in the future

3. Restoring and enhancing forest cover and responding to climate change by a combination of adaptation and mitigation measures

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Conservation/Environmental pollution
Green India Mission:

The National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) launched eight missions, and GIM is one of them.
Aiming to maintain, restore, and improve India’s dwindling forest cover and combating climate change through a combination of adaptation and mitigation strategies, GIM was introduced in February 2014.

Objectives of the Mission:

To protect, restore and enhance India’s falling forest cover.
To respond to climate change through a combination of adaptation as well as mitigation measures.
To increase forest-based livelihood
To enhance annual Carbon sequestration by 50 to 60 million tonnes in the year

Statement 1 and 2 are incorrect: Both the statements are irrelevant to Green India Mission.
Statement 3 is correct: The mission intends to increase forest/tree cover; improve/enhance ecosystem services and increase the forest-based livelihood income of about 3 million households.**

---

### Question 3

In the cities of our country, which among the following atmospheric gases are normally considered in calculating the value of the Air Quality Index?

Carbon dioxide
Carbon monoxide
Nitrogen dioxide
Sulfur dioxide
Methane

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 1, 4 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Air Pollution
Option (b) is the correct answer: CO2 , CO and SO2 are normally considered in calculating the value of the Air Quality Index.

The air quality index, or AQI, is a statistic that is used to inform the public of how filthy the air is now or is expected to become.
A growing proportion of the population is projected to endure worsening health impacts as AQI rises.
According to different national air quality standards, various countries have their own air quality indices.
The AQI is most frequently used to describe ozone levels at ground level.
The five contaminants that endanger human health can be represented by the AQI,

Ground-level Ozone or O3
Particulate Matter (soot and dust) or PM
Carbon Monoxide or CO
Sulphur Dioxide or SO2 and
Nitrogen Dioxide or NO2
All except Carbon dioxide are taken into consideration while calculating the AQI.**

---

### Question 4

The term ‘Intended Nationally Determined Contributions’ is sometimes seen in the news in the context of

- (a) Pledges made by the European countries to rehabilitate refugees from the war-affected Middle East
- (b) Plan of action outlined by the countries of the world to combat climate change
- (c) Capital contributed by the member countries in the establishment of Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
- (d) Plan of action outlined by the countries of the world regarding Sustainable Development Goals
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Climate Change/Global Warming
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions: Plan of action outlined by the countries of the world to Combat Climate Change

Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) are (intended) reductions in greenhouse gas emissions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
NDCs are at the heart of the Paris Agreement and embody efforts by each country to reduce national emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change.
The UNFCCC, in its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) Synthesis Report, has called for more ambitious climate action plans by the countries in order to achieve the Paris Agreement target of containing global temperature rise to 2°C by the end of the century (ideally it is 1.5°C).
The NDC Synthesis Report covers submissions up to 31st December 2020 and includes new or updated NDCs by 75 Parties, which represent approximately 30% of global greenhouse gas emissions.
The report was sought ahead of the 26th session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 26) to the UNFCCC which is scheduled to take place from 1st- 12th November 2021, in Glasgow, UK.
Each NDC reflects the country’s ambition, taking into account its domestic circumstances and capabilities.**

---

### Question 5

What is ‘Greenhouse Gas Protocol’?

- (a) It is an international accounting tool for government and business leaders to understand, quantify and manage greenhouse gas emissions.
- (b) It is an initiative of the United Nations to offer financial incentives to developing countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to adopt eco-friendly technologies
- (c) It is an inter-governmental agreement ratified by all the member countries of the United Nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to specified levels by the year 2022
- (d) It is one of the multilateral REDD+ initiatives hosted by the World Bank
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Global Warming
Option (a) is the correct answer: ‘Greenhouse Gas Protocol’ is an International Accounting Tool for Government and Business Leaders

GHG Protocol is developing standards, tools and online training that helps countries to measure and manage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from private and public sector operations, value chains and mitigation

GHG Protocol:

To assist nations, cities, and businesses in monitoring their progress toward their climate goals, GHG Protocol is creating standards, tools, and online training.
GHG Protocol establishes frameworks to measure and manage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from private and public sector operations, value chains and mitigation
The GHG Protocol arose when the World Resources Institute (WRI) and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) recognized the need for an international standard for corporate GHG accounting and reporting in the late**

---

### Question 6

With reference to the Agreement at the UNFCCC Meeting in Paris in 2015, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. The Agreement was signed by all the member countries of the UN and it will go into effect in 2017.

2. The Agreement aims to limit greenhouse gas emissions so that the rise in average global temperature by the end of this century does not exceed 2 degrees C or even 1.5 degrees C above pre-industrial levels.

3. Developed countries acknowledged their historical responsibility in global warming and committed to donate $1000 billion a year from 2020 to help developing countries to cope with climate change.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Summits and Conventions
Statement 1 is incorrect: It was only “agreed” by 195 nations in Paris at the conference. The agreement will enter into force only after 55 countries that account for at least 55% of global emissions have deposited their instruments of ratification.
Statement 2 is correct: Paris Summit COP21 aims to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels. It requires all parties to put forward their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) which are voluntary in nature.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Developed countries will work to define a clear roadmap on ratcheting up climate finance to USD 100 billion (not USD 1000 billion) by 2020.
Paris Summit COP21:

Legally binding International Treaty on Climate Change.
It was adopted by 196 Parties at COP 21 in Paris, on 12 December 2015 & entered into force on 4 November 2016.
Aim: to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels.
It requires all parties to put forward their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) which are voluntary in nature.





NOTE: Following basic information about COP21 from any newspaper/monthly magazine was enough to solve this rather difficult question. Observe statement 3 carefully, the examiner has just made his efforts to mention “USD100Bn as USD1000Bn” to make the statement incorrect and confuse aspirants. If we eliminate option 3, we get the correct answer i.e. only 2.

Itn 2017, UPSC asked question about the spread of the Himalayas, Western Ghats and Pulicat lake with the similar trick of changing/interchanging
In 2016, UPSC asked question on “Astrosat” with the similar trick of changing/interchanging numbers.

The key takeaway from the above question is to read numbers very carefully and cautiously.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following statements:

The Sustainable Development Goals were first proposed in 1972 by a global think tank called the ‘Club of Rome’.
The Sustainable Development Goals have to be achieved by 2030.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b         
Sub-Theme: Sustainable Development Goals
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a collection of 17 global goals designed to be a “blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all”
The SDGs are a part of UN Resolution 70/1, the 2030 Agenda, which was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 2015.
They are known as “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” in official documents.
Statement 1 is incorrect: In 1972, the Club of Rome’s first major Report, ‘The Limits to Growth’ was published.
Statement 2 is correct: In 2015, the United Nations General Assembly approved 17 goals with 169 associated targets. They became effective from 1/1/2016 and were to be achieved by 2030.**

---

### Question 8

What is/are the importance/ importances of the ‘United Convention to Combat Desertification’?

1. It aims to promote effective action through innovative national programmes and supportive international partnerships

2. It has a special/particular focus on South Asia and North Africa regions, and its Secretariat facilitates the allocation of major portions of financial resources to these regions.

3. It is committed to a bottom-up approach, encouraging the participation of local people in combating the desertification.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c        
Sub-Theme: Major Conventions
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION TO COMBAT
DESERTIFICATION (UNCCD):

Established in 1994.
It is the sole legally binding international agreement   linking  environment and development to sustainable land management.
Aim: Its 197 Parties aim, through partnerships, to implement the Convention and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The end goal is to protect land from over-use and drought, so it can continue to provide food, water and energy.

Statement 1 is correct: Its 197 Parties aim, through partnerships, to implement the Convention and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The end goal is to protect the land from overuse and drought, so it can continue to provide food, water and energy.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The Convention addresses specifically the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, known as the drylands, where some of the most vulnerable ecosystems and peoples can be found.
Statement 3 is correct: The UNCCD is particularly committed to a bottom-up approach, encouraging the participation of local people in combating desertification and land degradation.**

---

### Question 9

Consider the following pairs:

Terms sometimes seen in the news : Their origin

1. Annex-I Countries                        : Cartagena Protocol

2. Certified Emissions Reductions    : Nagoya Protocol

3. Clean Development Mechanisms : Kyoto Protocol

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Major Conventions
Classification of Parties and their commitments under Kyoto Protocol:



 
Annex I
Developed countries [US, UK, Russia etc.] + Economies in transition (EIT) [Ukraine, Turkey, some eastern European countries etc.]


 
 
 
Annex II
Developed countries (Annex II is a subset of Annex I).
Required to provide financial and technical support to the EITs and developing countries to assist them in reducing their greenhouse gas emissions.


 
 
 
 
Annex B
Annex I Parties with first or second- round Kyoto greenhouse gas emissions targets.
The first-round targets apply over the years 2008–2012 and the second- round Kyoto targets, apply from 2013 to 2020.
Compulsory binding targets to reduce GHG emissions.


 
 
Non-Annex I
Parties to the UNFCCC are not listed in Annex I of the Convention (mostly low-income developing countries).
No binding targets to reduce GHG emissions.


 
LDCs
Least-developed countries
No binding targets to reduce GHG emissions.




Options 1 and 2 are incorrect: Terms in these options are associated with the Kyoto Protocol.
Option 3 is correct: Clean Development Mechanism is associated with the Kyoto Protocol.**

---

### Question 10

With reference to an initiative called ‘The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB)’, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. It is an initiative hosted by UNEP, IMF and World Economic Forum.

2. It is a global initiative that focuses on drawing attention to the economic benefits of  biodiversity.

3. It presents an approach that can help decision- makers recognize, demonstrate and capture the value of ecosystems and biodiversity.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Major Environmental Conventions/ Environmental Policies and Initiatives
The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB)

Launched by Germany and the European Commission in 2007
Study led by Pavan Sukhdev
It is a global effort to raise awareness of the economic advantages of biodiversity.
Objective: To raise attention to the rising costs associated with biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation and to bring together experts in science, economics, and policy to facilitate actionable solutions.

Statement 1 is incorrect: It is an international initiative, launched by Germany and the European Commission.
Statement 2 is correct: It is an international initiative to draw attention to the global economic benefits of biodiversity.
Statement 3 is correct: Its objective is to highlight the growing cost of biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation and to draw together expertise from the fields of science, economics and policy to enable practical actions.**

---

### Question 11

Which of the following statements is/are correct?

Proper design and effective implementation of UN- REDD+ Programme can significantly contribute to:

protection of biodiversity
resilience of forest ecosystems
poverty reduction

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Environmental Conventions/ Environmental Policies and Initiatives
The UN-REDD Programme has identified the following three topics for supporting national REDD+ governance structures:

Country-led multi-stakeholder governance assessments that contribute to the development and implementation of national REDD+ strategies (for tackling forest degradation and biodiversity loss) and nationally owned monitoring frameworks
Social standards, including poverty and
Land and/or carbon tenure and the role of REDD+ within national land use strategies

UN REDD+

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) is a mechanism developed by Parties of the 
In order to provide incentives for developing countries to cut emissions from forested lands and invest in low-carbon paths, it sets a financial value for the carbon contained in forests.
For activities based on results, the developing countries will be compensated.The REDD+ goes beyond simply deforestation and forest degradation by including the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.**

---

### Question 12

With reference to ‘Agenda 21’, sometimes seen in the news, consider the following statements:

It is a global action plan for sustainable development.
It originated in the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg in 2002.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Sustainable Development Goals
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development:

The Rio  Declaration  consisted  of 27 principles intended to guide countries in future sustainable development. It was signed by over 175 countries.

Agenda 21:

It is a non-binding action plan sourced from Rio Earth Summit, 1992.
The number “21” refers to an agenda for the 21st century.
Objective: to achieve Global sustainable
Since 2015, Sustainable Development Goals are included in the Agenda 2030.**

---

### Question 13

The FAO accords the status of ‘Globally Important Agricultural Heritage System (GIAHS)’ to traditional agricultural systems.

What is the overall goal of this initiative?

1. To provide modern technology, training in modern farming methods and financial support to local communities of identified GIAHS so as to greatly enhance their agricultural productivity.

2. To identify and safeguard eco-friendly traditional farm practices and their associated landscapes, agricultural biodiversity and knowledge systems of the local communities.

3. To provide Geographical Indication status to all the varieties of agricultural produce in such identifies GIAHS.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Major Environmental Organizations



Globally Important Agricultural Heritage System (GIAHS)
Outstanding landscapes of aesthetic beauty constitute “Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems” that mix resilient ecosystems, agricultural biodiversity, and priceless cultural legacy.
The FAO established the Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) programme to protect and promote the world’s agricultural heritage systems.



Statement 1 is incorrect: Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) was started by the FAO to safeguard and support the world’s agricultural heritage systems.
Statement 2 is correct: The initiative intends to safeguard the social, cultural, economic and environmental goods and services of these heritage systems.
Statement 3 is incorrect: There is no such provision. GI is accorded to products from a certain origin (e.g. Hyderabadi Biryani) and not to all traditional agricultural systems.

Three sites recognised as GIAHS in India:




Kuttanad Below Sea Level Farming System of Kerala.
Koraput Traditional  Agriculture of Odisha.
Pampore Saffron Heritage of Kashmir.







NOTE: The central theme of the question is “Heritage System”. Statement 1 talks about “modern technology, training in modern farming” which is in contradiction to the given question, so this can be marked as incorrect. Statement 3 is also incorrect as FAO has no role in accordance with GI status. In India, GI status is governed by the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 (GI Act) in India. Geographical Indications protection is granted through the TRIPS Agreement.**

---

### Question 14

What is/are unique about ‘Kharai camel’, a breed found in India?

It is capable of swimming up to three kilometres in seawater.
It survives by grazing on mangroves.
It lives in the wild and cannot be domesticated.

Select the correct answer using the code given

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Species (Fauna)
Statement 1 is correct: Kharai camels have a special ability to swim in seawater and feed on saline plants and mangroves, which is how they get their name, Kharai. Recognized as a separate breed a few years ago by the National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR), the Kharai camel is probably the only domesticated breed of camel that lives in dual ecosystems. There are two camel breeds in Kutch, a coastal region of Gujarat that is also a sizable desert territory. IUCN Red List: Endangered
Statement 2 is correct: Kharai camels are known to feed on mangroves on the island offshore. And to eat this salty marine food, they sometimes swim for hours.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Given the breed’s ability to survive both on land and sea, this particular statement is highly unlikely.
NOTE: Observe the extreme keyword ‘cannot’ in statement 3, it makes the statement a bit absurd from the other two statements. Hence, by eliminating this single statement you can easily reach the correct answer.**

---

### Question 15

With reference to ‘Red Sanders’, sometimes seen in the news, consider the following statements:

It is a tree species found in a part of South India.
It is one of the most important trees in the tropical rainforest areas of South India.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a         
Sub-Theme: Species (Flora)
Statement 1 is correct: Red Sanders is an Indian endemic tree species, with a restricted geographical range in the Eastern Ghats. It is endemic to a distinct tract of forests in Andhra Pradesh. Red Sanders usually grow in the rocky, degraded and fallow lands with Red Soil and hot and dry climate. IUCN Red List: Endangered.
Statement 2 is incorrect: It occurs in the forest formation which is classified as “Southern Tropical Dry Deciduous Forests”.
Threats: Illicit felling for smuggling, forest fires, cattle grazing and other anthropogenic threats. The tree is known for their rich hue and therapeutic properties, are high in demand across Asia, particularly in China and Japan, for use in cosmetics and medicinal products as well as for making furniture, woodcraft and musical instruments.**

---

### Question 16

In which of the following regions of India are you most likely to come across the ‘Great Indian Hornbill’ in its natural habitat?

- (a) Sand deserts of northwest India
- (b) Higher Himalayas of Jammu and Kashmir
- (c) Salt marshes of western Gujarat
- (d) Western Ghats
Explanation


**Ans: d         
 Sub-Theme: Species – Fauna
Great Indian Hornbill (Western Ghats, Nilgiris)
Option (d) is the correct answer: The great hornbill (Buceros bicornis) also known as the great Indian hornbill or great pied hornbill, is one of the larger members of the hornbill family. A large majority of their population is found in India with a significant proportion in the Western Ghats and the Nilgiris. They also occur in Myanmar, islands in the Mergui archipelago, southern China, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, peninsular Malaysia and in Sumatra, Indonesia.**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

Consider the following pairs:

Famous Place
Region


1. Bodhgaya
Baghelkhand


2. Khajuraho
Bundelkhand


3. Shirdi
Vidarbha


4. Nasik (Nashik)
Malwa


5. Tirupati
Rayalaseema

Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched? (a) 1, 2 and 4

- (b) 2, 3, 4 and 5
- (c) 2 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Religious Places
Pair 1 is incorrect: Bodh Gaya is a holy landmark and pilgrimage destination linked with the Mahabodhi Temple Complex in Gaya, Bihar, India. It is one of the four main pilgrimage sites related with the life of Gautama Buddha, the other three are Kushinagar, Lumbini, Sarnath. In 2002, UNESCO declared the Mahabodhi Temple in Bodh Gaya a World Heritage Site.
Pair 2 is correct: The Khajuraho Temples in Madhya Pradesh’s Bundelkhand region are some of the most exquisite examples of medieval architecture in the world. It was built by the Chandela Dynasty between 950 and 1050 AD. There are Hindu and Jain temples among the monuments. In 1986, UNESCO designated these temples as World Heritage Sites. The temples are renowned for the symbolic architecture in the Nagara style. Initially reported in 1022 AD by Abu Raihan al Biruni and in AD 1335 by Ibn Battuta.
Pair 3 is incorrect: Shirdi is a city located in the Rahata taluka of Ahmednagar District, Maharashtra. According to legend, Sai Baba arrived in Shirdi in 1872 and remained there until his death on October 15, 1918.
Pair 4 is incorrect: Nashik is situated on the banks of river Godavari in the northwest region of Maharashtra and is famous for Kumbh Mela, which is held every 12 years.
Pair 5 is correct: Tirupati is a city situated in the Rayalaseema region of the Chittoor district of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. Shri Venkateswara Temple is well-known for being a Hindu temple.**

---

### Question 2

Which of the following is/are tributary/ tributaries of Brahmaputra?

Dibang
Kameng
Lohit

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Himalayan Drainage System/ Brahmaputra
Option 1 and 3 are correct: Dhansiri, Dibang and Lohit are the left bank tributaries of Brahmaputra River.
Option 2 is correct: Kameng is a right bank tributary of Brahmaputra River. Other major right bank tributaries of Brahmaputra are Subansiri, Manas, Sankosh.**

---

### Question 3

In which of the following regions of India are shale gas resources found?

Cambay Basin
Cauvery Basin
Krishna-Godavari Basin

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Resource/Map
About Shale Gas in India:

The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) has identified six basins as potentially shale gas bearing.



These are: Cambay, Assam-Arakan, Gondwana, Krishna-Godavari Basin, Cauvery Basin and the Indo Gangetic
Fine-grained sedimentary rocks called shale are potential rich sources of natural gas and
Shale rocks are typically found next to ‘aquifers’, or rocks that contain usable/ drinking water.
Shale gas is trapped under low permeable**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

Which of the following is/are the advantage/ advantages of practicing drip irrigation?

Reduction in weed
Reduction in soil salinity
Reduction in-soil erosion

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) None of the above is an advantage of practising drip irrigation
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Sustainable Agriculture
Drip Irrigation:

It is a form of irrigation where water is applied near the plant root through emitters or drippers, on or below the soil surface, at a low rate varying from 2-20 litres per Frequent watering helps to maintain the optimum level of soil moisture.
The most effective irrigation technique is drip irrigation, which may be used for a wide range of crops, including vegetables, orchard crops, flowers, and plantation

Advantages of Drip Irrigation:

Maximum use of available
No water being available to
Maximum crop
High efficiency in the use of
Weed growth is reduced and restricts the population of potential hosts.
Low labour and relatively low operation
No soil
Improved infiltration in soil of low
Ready adjustment to sophisticated automatic control.
No runoff of fertilizers into
Less water is lost to evaporation than during surface irrigation.
Improves seed
Decreased tillage

Disadvantages of Drip Irrigation:

Sensitivity to clogging
Moisture distribution problem
Salinity hazards
High cost compared to
For design, installation, and operation, high competence is needed.**

---

### Question 2

Which one of the following is the purpose of ‘UDAY’, a scheme of the Government?

- (a) Providing technical and financial assistance to startup entrepreneurs in the field of renewable sources of energy
- (b) Providing electricity to every household in the countries by 2018
- (c) Replacing the coal-based power plants with natural gas, nuclear, solar, wind and tidal power plants over a period of time
- (d) Providing for financial turnaround and revival of power distribution companies
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Government Policies
UDAY Scheme

It is the Government of India’s financial recovery and revival package for India’s electricity distribution firms (DISCOMs), which aims to permanently fix the financial crisis of the power distribution industry.
Objectives:

Improving operational efficiencies of discoms,
Reduction of cost of power,
Reduction in interest cost of discoms and
Enforcing financial discipline on discoms through alignment with state finances.**

---

### Question 3

What is/are the purpose/purposes of ‘District Mineral Foundations’ in India?

1. Promoting mineral exploration activities in mineral-rich districts

2. Protecting the interests of the persons affected by mining operations

3. Authorizing State Governments to issue licenses for mineral exploration

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Government policies
Statement 1 is incorrect: DMFs don’t work in promotion of mineral exploration activities in mineral rich districts, rather it work on the benefit of the persons and areas affected mining related operations.
Statement 2 is correct: The main objective of DMFs is to work for the interest of the benefit of the persons and areas affected mining related operations in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Statement 3 is incorrect: It does not authorise states to issue a licence for mineral exploration. Additional Information:
District Mineral Foundations (DMFs):

DMFs were instituted under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Amendment Act 2015.
They are non-profit trusts created to operate in the interest of those impacted by mining activities and for their own 
Miners’ contributions provide the funding for it.
Objective: To work for the interest of the benefit of the persons and areas affected mining related operations in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Jurisdiction: Its manner of operation comes under the jurisdiction of the relevant State government.





NOTE: Through our general understanding we know that DMFs work for the interest and benefit of persons and areas affected by mining related operations, hence, with this simple understanding we can rule out statement 3 easily and by eliminating this single statement we can easily arrive at the correct answer.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to ‘Bitcoins’, sometimes seen in the news, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. Bitcoins are tracked by the Central Banks of the countries.

2. Anyone with a Bitcoin address can send and receive Bitcoins from anyone else with a Bitcoin address.

3. Online payments can be sent without either side knowing the identity of the other.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Cryptocurrency
Statement 1 is incorrect: Bitcoin is a digital currency that is not tied to a bank or government and allows users to spend money anonymously.
Statements 2 and 3 are correct: Bitcoins have become popular because transactions can be made anonymously, making the currency popular with libertarians as well as tech enthusiasts, speculators and criminals. Also, anyone with a Bitcoin address can send and receive Bitcoins from anyone else with a Bitcoin address.
Bitcoin:

Bitcoin is a digital currency that is not tied to any formal institution like bank or government and it also allows users to transact anonymously.
Generally the coins are created by users who “mine’’ them by lending computing power to verifying other users’ transactions.
They receive bitcoins in exchange. The buying and selling of coins also can be done on exchanges with U.S. dollars and other
Bitcoins became popular due to its anonymous transactions, making the currency popular with libertarians as well as tech enthusiasts, speculators and
Anyone with a Bitcoin address can send and receive Bitcoins from anyone else with a Bitcoin address.**

---

### Question 5

What is/are the purpose/purposes of the Government’s ‘Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme’ and ‘Gold Monetization Scheme’?

1. To bring the idle gold lying with Indian households into the economy.

2. To promote FDI in the gold and jewellery sector

3. To reduce India’s dependence on gold imports.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Government policies
Statements 1 and 3 are correct: The primary objectives of these schemes were to reduce India’s gold imports and bring all the gold lying idle with individuals and households.
Statement 2 is incorrect: All Scheduled Commercial Banks excluding RRBs are eligible to implement the Scheme. Both the schemes are not intended to promote FDI in the gold and jewellery sector.
Gold Monetization Scheme and Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme:

The government had introduced three ambitious plans to lower the physical demand for gold and remove 20,000 tonnes of the precious metal from households where it was sitting inert and worth $800 billion.
PM launched the maiden sovereign gold bond, gold monetisation and the Indian gold coin scheme.
Objective: To reduce India’s gold imports and bring all the gold lying idle with individuals and Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme was launched under the Gold Monetisation Scheme in November 2015.
Sovereign Gold Bonds (SGBs) are government securities denominated in grams of gold issued by the RBI on behalf of the Government.
The Gold Monetization Scheme aims to minimise the nation’s dependency on gold imports by enabling the use of gold held by households and facilitating their mobilisation for productive uses.
Except for RRBs, all Scheduled Commercial Banks may implement the Scheme. Both programmes are not meant to encourage FDI in the gold and jewellery industry.**

---

### Question 6

The establishment of ‘Payment Banks’ is being allowed in India to promote financial Which of the following statements is/are correct in this context?

1. Mobile telephone companies and supermarket chains that are owned and controlled by residents are eligible to be promoters of Payment Banks.

2. Payment Banks can issue both credit cards and debit cards.

3. Payment Banks cannot undertake lending activities

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b        
 Sub-Theme: Banking Licences
Statement 1 is correct: Eligible promoters for payment banks include Mobile phone companies, supermarket chains, public sector entities, real sector cooperatives, etc.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Credit risk is not involved with the Payments Bank. It can carry out most banking operations but cannot advance loans or issue credit cards.
Statement 3 is correct: As per RBI guidelines, Payment Banks are not permitted to engage in lending activities.**

---

### Question 7

The term ‘Core Banking Solution’ is sometimes seen in the news. Which of the following statements best describes/describe this term?

1. It is a network of a bank’s branches which enables customers to operate their accounts from any branch of the bank on its network regardless of where they open their accounts.

2. It is an effort to increase RBI’s control over commercial banks through computerization.

3. It is a detailed procedure by which a bank with huge non-performing assets is taken over by another bank.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Banking Functions: Core banking solution (CBS)
Statement 1 is correct: Core Banking Solution (CBS) is a network of bank branches, which allows customers to manage their accounts, and use various banking facilities from any part of the world.
Statement 2 is incorrect: RBI doesn’t use CBS as a tool to exercise control over commercial banks through computerization.
Statement 3 is incorrect: CBS has nothing to do with NPAs.**

---

### Question 8

What is/are the purpose/purposes of the ‘Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate (MCLR)’ announced by RBI?

1. These guidelines help improve the transparency in the methodology followed by banks for determining the interest rates on advances.

2. These guidelines help ensure availability of bank credit at interest rates which are fair to the borrowers as well as the banks.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Banking Mechanisms/Functions
Objectives of MCLR:

Improving the transmission of the policy rate into lending rates of the bank
Bringing transparency in the methods followed by various banks for the determination of interest rate.
Ensuring the availability of bank loans at rates that are fair to both lenders and borrowers.

Enabling the lender and bank to be competitive and improve their worth in the long run.**

---

### Question 9

There has been a persistent deficit budget year after year. Which action/actions of the following can be taken by the Government to reduce the deficit?

1. Reducing revenue expenditure

2. Introducing new welfare schemes

3. Rationalizing subsidies

4. Reducing import duty

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Budget
Statement 1 is correct: Reducing the revenue expenditure will certainly help in bridging the gap.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Introducing new welfare schemes will most likely result in increasing expenditure and so will expanding industries which would require capital infusion. These steps will increase the budget deficit.
Statement 3 is correct: Subsidies are a part of expenditure and rationalizing them would reduce the deficit.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Reducing import duty will result in further widening of the gap.**

---

### Question 10

Which of the following is/are included in the capital budget of the Government of India?

1. Expenditure on acquisition of assets like roads, buildings, machinery, etc.

2. Loans received from foreign governments

3. Loans and advances granted to the States and Union Territories

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Budget
Statement 1 is correct: Capital Expenditure includes the expenditure on the acquisition of land, building, machinery, equipment, creating assets such as roads and hospitals, repayment of government borrowings.
Statement 2 is correct: Capital receipts components are: Loan borrowings, disinvestments, funds received from the issue of shares or debentures, etc.
Statement 3 is correct: Loans, and advances by the central government to state and union territory governments, etc. are also included in the capital budget of the Government of India.**

---

### Question 11

With reference to ‘Financial Stability and Development Council’, consider the following statements:

1. It is an organ of NITI Aayog.

2. It is headed by the Union Finance Minister.

3. It monitors macroprudential supervision of the economy.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Banking and NBFCs
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) under the chairmanship of the Union Finance Minister was set up by the government as the apex-level forum in December 2010. It was set up much before NITI Aayog was even set up. Statement 2 is correct: The Chairman of the council is the finance minister.
Statement 3 is correct: The Council monitors macro-prudential supervision of the economy, which includes functioning of large financial conglomerates.
Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC):

In order to serve as the apex level forum, the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) was established by the government in December 2010.
The Chairman of the Council is the Union Finance Minister and its members include:

The heads of financial sector Regulators (RBI, SEBI, PFRDA, IRDA & FMC)
Finance Secretary and/or Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs,
Secretary,     Department    of     Financial Services,
Chief Economic Adviser.


The Council can invite experts to its meeting if required.
Functions:

To improve inter-regulatory coordination, institutionalize financial sector development, and strengthen the system for preserving financial stability.
To monitor macro-prudential super- vision of the economy. It assesses the functioning of the large financial conglomerates.**

---

### Question 12

Which of the following best describes the term ‘import cover’, sometimes seen in the news?

- (a) It is the ratio of value of imports to the Gross Domestic Product of a country
- (b) It is the total value of imports of a country in a year
- (c) It is the ratio between the value of exports and that of imports between two countries
- (d) It is the number of months of imports that could be paid for by a country’s international reserves
Explanation


**Ans: d         
 Sub-Theme: BoP
Import cover serves as a crucial currency stability indicator. It measures the number of months of money available in the national bank to cover the cost of imports or the stock of foreign exchange reserves in terms of months of retained imports of goods as at end of year. Hence, it is the number of months of imports that could be paid for by a country’s international reserves.**

---

### Question 13

In the context of which of the following do you sometimes find the terms ‘amber box, blue box and green box’ in the news?

- (a) WTO affairs
- (b) SAARC affairs
- (c) UNFCCC affairs
- (d) India-EU negotiations on FTA
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: WTO

In WTO jargon Domestic agricultural subsidies are denoted by “Boxes,” specifically Green Box, Amber Box, and Blue Box.

Amber Box: It refers to a category of domestic support or subsidies under the WTO’s Agreement on Agriculture. With limited exceptions, all domestic assistance policies that distort commerce and production are classified under amber box.
Blue Box: This is the “amber box with conditions” – conditions designed to reduce distortion. Any support that would normally be in the amber box, is placed in the blue box if the support also requires farmers to limit production by imposing production quotas. It is an exemption from the general rule that all subsidies linked to production must be reduced or kept within defined minimal levels.
Green Box: Subsidies that do not distort trade or at most cause minimal distortions are placed in Green Box. These subsidies have to be government- funded (not by charging consumers higher prices) and must not involve price support.**

---

### Question 14

With reference to the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC), consider the following statements:

1. IMFC discusses matters of concern affecting the global economy, and advises the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on the direction of its

2. The World Bank participates as an observer in IMFC’s meetings.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Various Financial Committee/ Organisations
Statement 1 is correct: International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) advises and reports to the IMF Board of Governors on the supervision and management of the international monetary and financial system. Although it lacks formal decision- making authority, in practice it has developed into a key tool for providing strategic direction to the work and policies of the IMF.
Statement 2 is correct: A number of international institutions, including the World Bank, participate as observers in the IMFC’s meetings.**

---

### Question 15

India’s ranking in the ‘Ease of Doing Business Index’ is sometimes seen in the Which of the following has declared that ranking?

- (a) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
- (b) World Economic Forum
- (c) World Bank
- (d) World Trade Organization (WTO)
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Reports and Indexes/ World Bank Reports

Ease of Doing Business Index is published by the World Bank. It is an aggregate figure that includes different parameters which define the ease of doing business in a It is calculated by adding up the distance to frontier ratings of various economies. The “regulatory best practices” for conducting business serve as the basis for the distance to frontier score, which compares economies based on that parameter. The index for ease of doing business is calculated based on the following indicators: Construction permits, registration, obtaining financing, tax payment mechanisms, etc.
Other Reports of World Bank:

Remittance Report
Universal Health Coverage Index
The Service trade restriction index
Ease of Living Index
Global Economic Prospect (GEP) Report
World Development Report
Human Capital Index**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

The Parliament of India acquires the power to legislate on any item in the State List in the national interest if a resolution to that effect is passed by the:

- (a) Lok Sabha by a simple majority of its total membership.
- (b) Lok Sabha by a majority of not less than two-thirds of its total membership
- (c) Rajya Sabha by a simple majority of its total membership
- (d) Rajya Sabha by a majority of not less than two- thirds of its members present and voting
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Legislative Power of Parliament
Legislative Power

In accordance with the Constitution the Parliament has the authority to enact legislation on all matters listed in the Union List and Concurrent List.
If the Rajya Sabha passes a resolution to that effect with not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, the Union Parliament may legislate on any item on the State List in the interest of the country.
As per Article 250, it can also formulate laws over the State List when an Emergency is declared in the country, or President’s Rule is declared in any State.
Article 253 says that it can also formulate laws on any matter pertaining to the State List if it is deemed necessary for the implementation of international treaties or agreements concluded with foreign
Apart from these legislative powers the Parliament also enjoys the Executive Power, Financial Powers, Constituent Powers, Judicial Powers, Electoral Powers, and other**

---

### Question 2

Which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. A Bill pending in the Lok Sabha lapses on its prorogation.

2. A Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha, which has not been passed by the Lok Sabha, shall not lapse on dissolution of the Lok Sabha.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Legislative Procedure of Parliament

Statement 1 is incorrect: No bill lapses on prorogation. Prorogation does not affect thebills or any other business pending before the House.
Statement 2 is correct: A Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha, which has not been passed by the Lok Sabha, shall not lapse on dissolution of the Lok Sabha.
Additional Information:

Bill lapses:

Bills pending in the Lok Sabha (whether originating in the Lok Sabha or transmitted to it by the Rajya Sabha)
Bills passed by the Lok Sabha but pending in the Rajya (Note – A bill originating in Lok Sabha lapses)


Bills does not lapse:

Bill not passed by the two Houses due to disagreement and if the president has notified the holding of a joint sitting before the dissolution of Lok Sabha.
Bill pending in the Rajya Sabha but not passed by the Lok Sabha.
Bill passed by both Houses but pending assent of the president.
Bill passed by both Houses but returned by the president for reconsideration of**

---

### Question 3

Consider the following statements:

1. The Chief Secretary in a State is appointed by the Governor of that State.

2. The Chief Secretary in a State has a fixed tenure.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: State Executives
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Chief Secretary is ‘chosen’ by the Chief Minister. As the appointment of Chief Secretary is an executive action of the Chief Minister, it is taken in the name of the Governor of the State.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Though the Administrative Reforms Commission, in its report on State Administration in 1969, had recommended that a Chief Secretary should have a minimum tenure of three to four years, there is no fixed tenure for the post of Chief Secretary of a State.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following statements:

1. The minimum age prescribed for any person to be a member of Panchayat is 25 years.

2. A Panchayat reconstituted after premature dissolution continues only for the remainder period.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Basics of Panchayati Raj System
Statement 1 is incorrect: Part IX of the Constitution deals with the Panchayati Raj System in India. The Panchayati Raj was constitutionalized in India through the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992. As per the act, no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than 25 years of age if he has attained the age of 21 years. Therefore, the minimum age is 21.
Statement 2 is correct: Panchayat reconstituted after premature dissolution does not enjoy the full period of five years but remains in office only for the remaining period.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to the ‘Gram Nyayalaya Act’, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. As per the Act, Gram Nyayalayas can hear only civil cases and not criminal cases.

2.The Act allows local social activists as mediators/ re-conciliators.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b     
Sub-Theme: Judicial Power of Panchayat
Statement 1 is incorrect: The establishment, jurisdiction, and process in civil and criminal proceedings are all outlined in the Gram Nyayalayas Act. As per the Gram Nyayalaya Act, the Gram Nyayalayas can hear both the civil and criminal cases.
Statement 2 is correct: The Court shall try to settle disputes via conciliation between the parties and the court can make use of the conciliators (social workers) to be appointed for this purpose.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

The Montague-Chelmsford Proposals were related to:

- (a) social reforms
- (b) educational reforms
- (c) reforms in police administration
- (d) constitutional reforms
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Administrative Reforms/Montague- Chelmsford Reforms Act
Montague-Chelmsford Proposals had the scheme of constitutional reforms, known as the Montagu-Chelmsford (or Mont-Ford) Reforms, which led to the enactment of the Government of India Act of 1919.

The GoI Act 1919 introduced a diarchy (rule of two individuals/parties) for the executive at the level of the provincial government.
The diarchy was implemented in eight provinces: Assam, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Central Provinces, United Provinces, Bombay, Madras and Punjab.
The Dyarchy system increased the authority of the provincial governments.
In the province, the governor was to serve as the chief executive.**

---

### Question 2

What was the main reason for the split in the Indian National Congress at Surat in 1907?

- (a) Introduction of communalism into Indian politics by Lord Minto
- (b) Extremists’ lack of faith in the capacity of the moderates to negotiate with the British Government
- (c) Foundation of Muslim League
- (d) Aurobindo Ghosh’s inability to the elected as the President of the Indian National Congress
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Important INC Sessions/Surat Split/ Swadeshi Movement
Option (a) is incorrect: Morley-Minto Reforms, 1909 introduced separate electorates  on  the  basis  of  religion, thus introducing a system of communal representation. This was not the reason for the Congress split in 1907.
Option (b) is correct: On the backdrop of the Swadeshi Movement, the Extremists wanted either B.G. Tilak or Lajpat Rai as President. Moderates proposed Rashbehari Ghosh and wanted the session to be in Surat in order to exclude Tilak from the presidency. Since a leader from the host province could not be session president, they also sought to drop resolutions on swadeshi, boycott and national education. Thus it resulted in a split in the congress. Therefore, Extremists’ lack of faith in the capacity of the moderates to negotiate with the British Government’.
Option (c) is incorrect: Formation of Muslim League in 1906 at Dhaka was not the reason for Congress split in 1907.
Option (d) is incorrect: This is irrelevant to the particular question.



NOTE: Question on similar theme/topic i.e Surat Split/Swadeshi Movement came in 2015.**

---

### Question 3

The ‘Swadeshi’ and ‘Boycott’ were adopted as methods of struggle for the first time during the:

- (a) agitation against the Partition of Bengal
- (b) Home Rule Movement
- (c) Non-Cooperation Movement
- (d) visit of the Simon Commission to India
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Swadeshi Movement
Option (a) is correct: The ‘Swadeshi’ and ‘Boycott’ were the mass movements to oppose the Bengal partition.
Option (b) is incorrect: The Home Rule Movement in 1916 was the Indian response to the First World War in a less charged but in more effective way. With people already feeling the burden of war time miseries caused by high taxation and a rise in prices, Tilak and Annie Besant ready to assume the leadership, the movement started with great vigour.
Option (c) is incorrect: The time period of Swadeshi and Boycott Movement and Non- Cooperation Movement is different. Therefore it has no correlation with the Swadeshi and Boycott Movement.
Option (d) is incorrect: Simon Commission visited in 1928 to review the constitutional reform in Britain’s largest and most important possession.**

---

### Question 4

The plan of Sir Stafford Cripps envisaged that after the Second World War:

- (a) India should be granted complete independence
- (b) India should be partitioned into two before granting independence
- (c) India should be made a republic with the condition that she will join the Commonwealth
- (d) India should be given Dominion status
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Cripps Mission
Cripps Mission (1942):

In March 1942, a mission headed by Stafford Cripps was sent to India with constitutional proposals to seek Indian support for World War II.
Proposals:

Indian union with a Dominion status would be set up and it would be free to decide its relation with the UN and the Commonwealth.
After the war, the Constituent Assembly would be formed with members from Provinces (elected through proportional representation) and Princely states (nominated).


Conditions of accepting the New Constitution:

 Any Province not willing to join the Union can have a separate Constitution and form a separate union.
 New Constitution-making Body and the Government would negotiate a treaty for Transfer of Power.**

---

### Question 5

Satya Shodhak Samaj organized:

- (a) a movement for upliftment of tribals in Bihar
- (b) a temple-entry movement in Gujarat
- (c) an anti-caste movement in Maharashtra
- (d) a peasant movement in Punjab
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Social Reform Organization
An anti-caste movement was organized by Satya Shodhak Samaj in Maharashtra.
Satyashodhak Samaj:

On 24 September 1873, Jotirao Govindrao Phule formed Satyashodhak Samaj to focus on the rights of depressed groups such as women, the Shudra, and the Dalit.
The Satya Shodhak Samaj opposed idolatry and condemned the caste system by doing
The Satyashodhak Samaj opposed the need for priests and advocated for the spread of reason.
Jotirao Govindrao Phule founded Satyashodhak Samaj with the goals of promoting the happiness, well-being, equality, and simplicity of religious practices for all people.
The Deenbandhu newspaper, published from Pune, gave the Samaj’s viewpoints a
Muslims, Brahmins, and government officials all belonged to the Leading members and financial backers for the group came from Phule’s own Mali caste.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following:

Calcutta Unitarian Committee
Tabernacle of New Dispensation
Indian Reform Association

Keshab Chandra Sen is associated with the establishment of which of the above?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Social Reform Movement/Social Reformist
Keshab Chandra Sen (1838-1884):

Appointed as Acharya of the Brahmo Samaj in 1858.
Spread the ideas of the Samaj outside Bengal (in United Provinces, Bombay, Punjab, etc.).
Showed radical views against caste system, favored inter-caste marriage.
Expelled from Acharya’s position in
Founded Brahmo Samaj of India (1866).
Ananda Mohan Bose, Shibchandra Deb, and Umesh Chandra Datta created the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj in opposition to his ideas.
Keshab Chandra Sen erected the mandir known as the Tabernacle of New Dispensation on January 24, 1868, in honour of the Magha Festival..
On October 29, 1870, the Indian Reform Association was founded with Keshab Chandra Sen as President. It comprised many people who did not belong to the Brahmo Samaj and represented the secular wing of the organisation.
The objective was to put into effect some of the concepts Sen was exposed to while in Britain.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

In the context of the developments in Bioinformatics, the term ‘transcriptome’, sometimes seen in the news, refers to

- (a) A range of enzymes used in genome editing
- (b) The full range of mRNA molecules expressed by an organism
- (c) The description of the mechanism of gene expression
- (d) A mechanism of genetic mutations taking place in cells
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Bioinformatics
Option (b) is correct: A transcriptome is the full range of messenger RNA, or mRNA, molecules expressed by an organism.
About Transcriptome:

A transcriptome is the full range of messenger RNA, or mRNA, molecules expressed by an organism.
The term “transcriptome” can also be used to describe the array of mRNA transcripts produced in a particular cell or tissue
In contrast with the genome, which is characterised by its stability, the transcriptome actively changes. In fact, an organism’s transcriptome varies depending on many factors, including the stage of development and environmental**

---

### Question 2

With reference to prepackaged items in India, is it mandatory to the manufacturer to put which of the following information on the main label, as per the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011?

List of ingredients including additives
Nutrition information
Recommendation, if any, made by the medical profession about the possibility of any allergic reactions
Vegetarian/nonvegetarian

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 2, 3 and 4
- (c) 1, 2 and 4
- (d) 1 and 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Food Safety Regulations
Option (c) is correct:

As per the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011, All pre-packaged items in India contain certain information such as Nutrition information, List of ingredients;, Vegetarian/Non-vegetarian/Vegan, Date of manufacture, Best before, Date of packing, Lot number, Code number, or Batch several-piece package, list of ingredients including additives, Food that has been prepackaged, a primary display panel, wholesale package.**

---

### Question 3

Which of the following statements is/are correct?

Virus can infect

Bacteria
Fungi
Plants

Select the correct answer using the code given below

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Microorganisms
Option (d) is correct: All kinds of life, including animals, plants, and microbes like bacteria and fungi, are susceptible to virus infection.

Small infectious agents called viruses can only reproduce inside the live cells of other
All kinds of life, including animals, plants, and microbes like bacteria and fungi, are susceptible to virus infection.
The following four categories of host best describe viruses in terms of the sort of host they infect:


Animal viruses, including human viruses, have DNA/RNA
Plant viruses, including algal
Mycoviruses (fungal viruses)-ds RNA
Bacteriophages (bacterial viruses), including cyanophages-DN**

---

### Question 4

With reference to ‘LiFi’, recently in the news, which of the following statements is/are correct?

It uses light as the medium for high-speed data transmission.
It is a wireless technology and is several times faster than ‘WiFi’.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Communication Technology
LiFi

LiFi is a Visible Light Communications system that transmits wireless internet communications at very high speeds. This technology uses LED light bulb pulses of light that are undetectable to the human eye and within those emitted pulses, data can travel to and from receivers.
The receivers then gather data and translate the delivered information. This is essentially comparable to deciphering Morse code, but it happens millions of times each second, which is significantly faster. LiFi transmission rates can exceed 100 Gbps, which is 14 times faster than WiGig, also referred to as the fastest WiFi in the 
In 2011, Harald Haas initially used the phrase in his Edinburgh TEDGlobal Li-Fi technology can transmit data and unlock capacity that is 10,000 times more than that which is available within the radio frequency by using the visible light spectrum.
The technology is similar to Wi-Fi in terms of its intended purpose, with the main technological distinction being that Wi-Fi uses radio frequency to induce a voltage in an antenna to transfer data, while Li-Fi employs modulation of light intensity to do
Statement 1 is correct: LiFi is a Visible Light Communications system transmitting wireless internet communications at very high speeds.
Statement 2 is correct: LiFi transmission speeds can go over 100 Gbps, 14 times faster than WiGig, also known as the world’s fastest WiFi.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to ‘Astrosat’,’ the astronomical observatory launched by India, which of the following statements is/are correct?

Other than USA and Russia, India is the only country to have launched a similar observatory into space.
Astrosat is a 2000 kg satellite placed in an orbit at 1650 km above the surface of the Earth.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Astronomical development

AstroSat is the first dedicated Indian astronomy mission aimed to study celestial sources in X-ray, optical and UV spectral bands. The payloads cover the energy bands of Ultraviolet (Near and Far), limited optical and X-ray regime (0.3 keV to 100keV).
The ability to simultaneously observe multiple celestial objects at multiple wavelengths with a single satellite is one of the special aspects of the AstroSat project.
India has joined the exclusive club of nations with its own space observatory with the successful launch of ASTROSAT, joining the US, Japan, Russia, and Europe. Along with six other foreign satellites, ASTROSAT, India’s first dedicated multi-wavelength space observatory, will aid in the knowledge of the cosmos.
Statement 1 is incorrect: ASTROSAT is India’s first dedicated multi-wavelength space observatory which will help in understanding the universe, and six other foreign satellites.
Statement 2 is incorrect: AstroSat with a lift- off mass of 1515 kg was launched on September 28, 2015 into a 650 km orbit inclined at an angle of 6 deg to the equator by PSLV-C30 from Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikota.




NOTE: it is an old technique of UPSC to weak with factual numbers. In the above question, the examiner changed the figures of ASTROSAT to make the statement incorrect. In 2016, the same was done with UNFCCC COP- 15 (Paris) in which the examiner replaced the pledge of mobilization of “USD100Bn” with “USD1000Bn”’ to make the statement incorrect. In 2017, Examiner replaced “six states” with “Five states’ ‘in “Western Ghats are spread over five states only” statement. They had also changed “12 states’ ‘ with “Five states” in “ Himalayas are spread over five States only” statement. However, the above -mentioned reasoning is applicable in most of the cases, but not in every case. It is advisable to stay alert whenever facts/data/ figures appear in a statement/question**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following statements:  The Mangalyaan launched by ISRO–

Is also called the Mars Orbiter Mission
Made India the second country to have a spacecraft orbit the Mars after USA
Made India the only country to be successful in making its spacecraft orbit the Mars in its very first attempt

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Space mission
Mangalyaan/Mars Orbiter Mission.

Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM), the maiden interplanetary mission of ISRO, that was launched on November 5, 2013 on PSLV-C25 entered into Martian orbit on September 24, 2014 in its first attempt.
MOM has completed 1000 Earth days in its orbit, on June 19, 2017, well beyond its designed mission life of six months. 1000 Earth days corresponds to 24 Mars Sols (Martian Solar day) and MOM completed 388 orbits.
It is India’s first interplanetary mission, and ISRO has joined the Soviet space programme, NASA, and the European Space Agency as the fourth space agency to reach Mars. It is the first country in Asia to enter Mars’ orbit, as well as the first country ever to do so.
The world’s most cost-effective inter- planetary expedition cleared the door for affordable access to outer space. With a budget of Rs 450 Cr, the launch vehicle, spacecraft, and ground segment were all
Statement 1 is correct: The Mangalyaan launched by ISRO is also called the Mars Orbiter Mission.
Statement 2 is incorrect: It is India’s first interplanetary mission and ISRO has become the fourth space agency to reach Mars, after the Soviet space Programme, NASA and the European Space Agency.
Statement 3 is correct: It is the first Asian nation to reach Mars orbit, and the first nation in the world to do so in its first attempt.**

---

### Question 7

India is an important member of the ‘International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor’. If this experiment succeeds, what is the immediate advantage for India?

- (a) It can use thorium in place of uranium for power generation
- (b) It attain a global role in satellite-navigation
- (c) It can drastically improve the efficiency of its fission reactors in power generation
- (d) It can build fusion reactors for power
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Nuclear Energy
The Correct answer is Option (d):
About International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor:

A worldwide nuclear fusion research and engineering megaproject called the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) aims to mimic the fusion processes of the Sun to produce energy on Earth.
The Sun and other stars derive their energy from fusion. Hydrogen nuclei clash, fuse into heavier helium atoms, and unleash enormous amounts of energy in the intense heat and gravity at the Centre of these star
An experimental device created to capture fusion energy is called a tokamak. The energy generated by the fusing of atoms inside a tokamak is absorbed as heat by the vessel’s walls.
Over 35 countries are working together on the ITER Project. China, the European Union, India, Japan, Korea, Russia, and the United States, who are all ITER members, have pooled their resources to break through one of science’s greatest barriers: replicating on Earth the limitless energy that powers the Sun and the stars.
ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) marked the beginning of the ITER Tokamak Assembly in July 2020 in Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France.**

---

---

