# UPSC Prelims 2017 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

With reference to the difference between the culture of Rigvedic Aryans and Indus Valley people, which of the following statements is/are correct?

Rigvedic Aryans used the coat of mail and helmet in warfare whereas the people of the Indus Valley Civilization did not leave any evidence of using.
Rigvedic Aryans knew gold, silver and copper whereas Indus Valley people knew only copper and iron.
Rigvedic Aryans had domesticated the horse whereas there is no evidence of Indus Valley people having been aware of this animal.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Significant features and lifestyle aspect of Aryans viz-a-viz Indus Valley Civilization
Statement 1 is correct: For offensive weapons, the Vedic-Aryans have the bow and arrow, spear, dagger, and axe, and for defensive armour the helmet and coat of mail. The Indus people also have the bow and arrow, spear, dagger and axe, but defensive armour is quite unknown to Indus valley people.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The metals which the Indo-Aryans used in the time of the Rigveda are gold and copper or bronze; but a little later, these metals are supplemented by silver and iron. Among the Indus people, silver is more common than gold, and utensils and vessels are sometimes made of stone – a relic of the Neolithic Age – as well as of copper and bronze. Statement 3 is correct: The horse seems to have been unknown to the inhabitants of Mohenjo-Jo-Daro and Harappa. But Many references have been made regarding the Surkotada site containing horse remains dated to 2000 BCE, which is considered a significant observation with respect to Indus Valley Civilisation. After evaluating the Surkotada bone fragments, Sándor Bökönyi (1997) concluded that at least six of the samples most likely belonged to the real horse. However, this is not definitive proof, and it does not imply that people in the Indus Valley knew about horses.




NOTE: Likewise in the above question (i.e. of 2017), In 2013, UPSC asked a question on Harappan Civilization in which “Horse” was the central theme in question.**

---

### Question 2

Which one of the following was a very important seaport in the Kakatiya kingdom?

- (a) Kakinada
- (b) Motupalli
- (c) Machilipatnam (Masulipatnam)
- (d) Nelluru
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Kakatiya Kingdom
Option (a) is incorrect: Kakinada Deep Water Port was commissioned by the Government of AP in November 1997.
Option (b) is correct: Motupalli was the chief port of the Kakatiyas and this port was visited by the Venetian traveller, Marco Polo.
Option (c) is incorrect: Machilipatnam was the main port of Golconda Kingdom.
Option (d) is incorrect: Nelluru (a port town) was part of Kakatiya kingdom in the 13th century. Later it changed hands between Kakatiya and Pandyas a few times until Prataprudra II defeated Pandyas. But this doesn’t seem to be as significant as Motupalli.**

---

---

## Art Culture

### Question 1

Which of the following is/are famous for Sun temples?

Arasavalli Amarkantak
Omkareshwar

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Ancient Indian Temple Architecture

Arasavalli Sun temple is located in Andhra Pradesh. The temple dates back to the 7th century and a Kalinga king is said to have constructed it.
Amarkantak is a pilgrim town in Madhya Pradesh and the origin of the Narmada river. Lord Shiva is worshipped as Narmadeswar Amranath 
Omkareshwar is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva. It is located in Madhya Pradesh and is one of the 12 Jyotirlingas.

List of famous Sun temples in India:
The Dakshinaarka temple at Gaya, Bihar:

There is an ancient Sun temple at Gaya in the state of Bihar.
Offerings to the ancestors are made at the Surya Kunda or the Dakshina Maanas tank in front of the temple.

The Bhramanya Dev Temple at Unao in Madhya Pradesh:

The Brahmana Dev (Baramju) temple dedicated to the Sun is located at Unao near Jhansi in Madhya Pradesh.
It is a well-visited
Local belief is that worshippers find relief from ailments such as blindness and leprosy and other skin diseases.

Sun Temple at Surya Pahar in Assam:

This relatively modern Sun temple in the vicinity of the Surya Pahar Hill near Goalpara in Assam.
This temple enshrines a circular stone tablet having 12 images of Aditya in a circle with an image of Kashyapa the father of Aditya in the centre.

Suryanar Temple near Kumbakonam in Tamil Nadu:

This ancient temple dedicated to the Sun is located near Kumbakonam in Tamil Kumbhakonam and its surroundings abound in huge temples.
This well-known temple enshrines the Sun – Surya, Kasi Viswanatha and Visalakshi, and the other eight celestial bodies namely Chandran, Angarakan, Budhan, Brihaspati, Sukran, Saniswaran, Rahu and Ketu.

Suryanarayana Swamy temple at Arasavalli in Andhra Pradesh:

This is a shrine of the Sun in a well-preserved
The temple dates back to the 7th century and a Kalinga king is said to have constructed
The image of worship is a 5 ft tall one of black granite holding lotus buds – flanked by Usha and Chhaya.
Padmapani is the name of this Sun God – the Padma stands for wisdom Usha and Chhaya stand for eternity

The Sun Temple at Modhera – Gujarat:

This is a grand temple to the Sun God conceived and built-in 1026.
As in the Sun Temple at Konark, this temple was so designed that the rays of the Sun
This dates back to the 13th century and it represents the highest point in Orissan temple architecture.
Konark is situated 20 miles to the northeast of Puri.
The word Konark means corner sun.**

---

### Question 2

The painting of Bodhisattva Padmapani is one of the most famous for illustrated paintings at:

- (a) Ajanta
- (b) Badami
- (c) Bagh
- (d) Ellora
Explanation


**Ans: a
 Sub-Theme: Rock cut painting
Correct answer is Option (a): The painting of Bodhisattva Padmapani is in Ajanta cave no 1, which dates back to the 5th century AD.

Mural of Padmapani in Ajanta cave

Other paintings of Bodhisattvas include Vajrapani (protector and guide, a symbol of Buddha’s power) and Manjusri (manifestation of Buddha’s wisdom).
In this painting, Bodhisattva is holding a lotus in his hand in a tribhanga pose.

NOTE: Reading pages no 54-55 from Fine Art NCERT will help you to solve this question. Also, details of Ajanta has already been discussed in earlier PYQs, where the question was on Buddha’s Mahaparinirvana.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to Manipuri Sankirtana, consider the following statements:

It is a song and dance performance.
Cymbals are the only musical instruments used in the performance.
It is performed to narrate the life and deeds of Lord Krishna.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Indian Folk or Local Dances
Statement 1 is correct: Manipuri Sankirtana involves ritual     singing,     drumming     and dancing.  It  was  also  inscribed  in  the Representative List of the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Of Humanity in 2013.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Not only Cymbals but Drums are also used in the performance. In a typical performance, two drummers and about ten singers-dancers perform in a hall encircled by devotees.
Statement 3 is correct: Lord Krishna life and deeds are the main theme of this performance. It is practised primarily by the Vaishnavite community.
Sankirtana:

It includes a wide range of artistic expressions carried out to commemorate special religious occasions and different phases in the lives of the Vaishnava people of the Manipur plains.
Sankirtana rituals are centred on the temple, where dancers and singers narrate stories of Lord Krishna’s life and actions through dance and song.
A typical performance of a drum and dance ensemble features two drummers and ten singer-dancers who perform in a hall or domestic courtyard surrounded by seated devotees.
The artists’ humility and the flow of their artistic and spiritual energy are unmatched, bringing audience members to tears.
Sankirtana has two main social functions:

It acts as a unifying factor within Manipur’s Vaishnava community by bringing them together on festive events throughout the year;
Through life-cycle rites, it creates and strengthens bonds between the individual and the community.

Thus, it is viewed as the visible manifestation of God.
The Sankirtana of Manipur is an active practice that fosters a natural connection with people; the entire society is involved in preserving it, and the unique knowledge and abilities are customarily passed down from mentor to disciple.
The myriad ceremonies of Sankirtana acknowledge the presence of natural world while fostering harmony with it.
The Sankirtana is a ritual dance and music form of Manipur.
The performance is carried out in a circle in an east-facing square performance
In 2013, UNESCO added Manipur’s distinctive cultural legacy to its Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to the religious history of India, consider the following statements:

Sautrantika and Sammitiya were the sects of
Sarvastivadin held that the constituents of phenomena were not wholly momentary, but existed forever in a latent form.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Buddhism
Statement 1 is incorrect. Sautrantika and Sammitiya were the sects of Buddhism.
Statement 2 is correct. Sarvastivadin considers everything empirical to be impermanent, they maintain that the dharma factors are eternally existing realities.
Sarvastivadin:

Believes in the eternal existence of dharma factors
Considers empirical phenomena as illusory but exist beyond the empirical world
Affirms the presence of past, present, and future
Criticized by Sautrantikas for violating the Buddhist idea of impermanence

Sautrantika:

Descended from the Sarvastivadins
Relies on sutras rather than Abhidharma commentaries
Adheres to extreme momentariness, believing only the current moment exists
Criticizes Sarvastivadin’s belief in the existence of past, present, and future phenomena

Sammitiya and other sub-schools:

Branches off from Vatsiputriya, a parent school
Well-known in Gujarat and Sindh during the

Maitraka dynasty

Speaks Apabhraṃśa as their primary language
Replaced Sarvastivadins as Sarnath’s most illustrious institution by the 4th century CE
Split into two sub-schools: Avantakas and Kurukulas**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following pairs:

Traditions
Communities


1. Chaliha Sahib Festival
Sindhis


2. Nanda Raj Jaat Yatra
Gonds


3. Wari -Warkari
Santhals

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) None of the above
Explanation


**Ans: a
 Sub-Theme: Cultural Traditions of India
Pair 1 is correct: Chalia sahib is the festival of the Sindhis which involves devotees fasting for days.
Pair 2 is incorrect: The Nanda Devi Jat is celebrated every year in the Nanda Devi temples spread across Garhwal and Kumaon regions.
Pair 3 is incorrect: Wari-Warkari is an annual pilgrimage to Pandharpur – the seat of the god Vithoba in Maharashtra for the Warkari sect.
NOTE: Here from  our  basic knowledge we can easily infer that neither Gonds are native to Uttarakhand nor Santhals are native to Maharashtra. So these festivals cannot be associated with these two tribes.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

The term ‘M-STrIPES’ is sometimes seen in the news in the context of

- (a) Captive breeding of Wild Fauna
- (b) Maintenance of Tiger Reserves
- (c) Indigenous Satellite Navigation System
- (d) Security of National Highways
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Technology in wildlife protection Option (b) is the correct answer: M-STrIPES stands for Monitoring system for Tigers –Intensive Protection and Ecological Status.
M-STrIPES:

Launched in 2010 by NTCA and WII across Indian tiger reserves.
It is a software-based monitoring system, designed to assist wildlife protection.
The system consists of two components: Field based methods for ecological monitoring, law enforcement, recording wildlife offences, and patrolling.
A specialised GIS application for reporting, analysis, and data storage.
Forest guards are required to use a GPS to track their movements as part of M-STrIPES, in addition to entering their observations on site- specific data sheets.**

---

### Question 2

Due to some reasons, if there is a huge fall in the population of species of butterflies, what could be its likely consequence/consequences?

Pollination of some plants could be adversely
There could be a drastic increase in the fungal infections of some cultivated plants.
It could lead to a fall in the population of some species of wasps, spiders and birds.

Select the correct using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Biotic Interaction
Pollination:

Transfer of pollen grains (shed from the anther) to the stigma of a pistil is termed pollination. Flowering plants have evolved an amazing array of adaptations to achieve
Kinds of Pollination: Depending on the source of pollen, pollination can be divided into three types –




Autogamy
Geitonogamy
Xenogamy



Statement 1 is correct: This is basic knowledge that Bees, butterflies and other biotic agents play a vital role in the pollination of plants and the production of crops by transporting pollen grains from one place to another.
Statement 2 is incorrect: There is no credible source or research behind this and moreover the extreme keyword ‘drastic’ in the statement makes it more absurd and irrelevant.
Statement 3 is correct: These are some of the common predators of butterflies: wasps, ants, parasitic flies, birds, snakes, toads, rats etc. The decline in the butterfly population would therefore adversely affect the food chain




NOTE: if we observe statement 2 carefully, the examiner used the word “drastic increase” which is extreme and absolute. It also connotes all of sudden change in the present situation. So, elimination of statement 2 left us with option (a) and option (c). Now it is common understanding that decline in butterfly population would adversely affect the food chain, so the reduction in other dependent species such as wasps, spiders and birds. So, statement 3 is correct.**

---

### Question 3

Which of the following statements can help in water conservation in agriculture?

Reduced or zero tillage of the land
Applying gypsum before irrigating the field
Allowing crop residue to remain in the field

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Agriculture and Environment

Statement 1 is correct: Conservation Tillage includes no-till farming or zero tillage is a way of growing crops or pasture from year to year without disturbing the soil through tillage. Zero tillage helps in soil moisture conservation.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Though, Gypsum helps in dissolution of the salt clay pan found in soils that hinder the percolation of water and helps in water conservation. But the official answer key published by UPSC shows option (c) as the correct answer. Thus, going by the UPSC key statement 2 is wrong.
Statement 3 is correct: Crop residues act as mulches and reduce evaporation losses and protect the soil from direct impact of raindrops, thus controlling crusting and sealing processes.**

---

### Question 4

Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) is a standard criterion for:

- (a) Measuring oxygen levels in blood
- (b) Computing oxygen levels in forest ecosystems
- (c) Pollution assay in aquatic ecosystems
- (d) Assessing oxygen levels in high altitude regions
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Water Pollution
Option (c) is the correct answer: Pollution assay in aquatic ecosystems is based on Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) criterion.

Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) is a measure of the amount of organic waste that pollutes water.
BOD is the amount of dissolved oxygen needed by bacteria in decomposing the organic wastes present in water. It is measured in milligrammes per litre of water of oxygen.
The higher value of BOD indicates low DO content of water.
BOD is not a reliable method for assessing water pollution because it only includes biodegradable elements.

NOTE: This is an easy and straight question from NCERT Class 11 Chemistry Chapter 14 (Environmental Chemistry), though the non- science graduates may not find interest in reading class 11 and 12 science NCERTs this particular chapter is very important for the environment and ecology.**

---

### Question 5

In the context of solving pollution problems, what is/are the advantage/advantages of bioremediation technique?

1. It is a technique for cleaning up pollution by enhancing the same biodegradation process that occurs in nature.

2.  Any contaminant with heavy metals such as cadmium and lead can be readily and completely treated by bioremediation using

3. Genetic engineering can be used to create microorganisms specifically designed for

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: (c)
Sub-Theme: Eco-Engineering
Benefits of Bioremediation:

It minimises damage to ecosystems by just using natural methods.
In order to remove toxins from soil and groundwater, bioremediation frequently takes place underground, where pumped-in nutrients and bacteria can be used.
As a result, compared to other cleanup techniques, bioremediation causes less disruption to the neighbourhood
A minor change or addition designed to the environment, such as molasses, vegetable oil, or simple air optimises conditions for microbes to flourish, thereby accelerating the completion of the bioremediation
It produces comparatively few harmful byproducts (mainly due to the fact that contaminants and pollutants are converted into water and harmless gases like carbon dioxide).
Since it doesn’t require a lot of labour or expensive equipment, it is less expensive than most cleanup techniques.

Statement 1 is correct: Bioremediation uses naturally occurring organisms to break down hazardous substances into less toxic or non-toxic substances.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Not all contaminants are easily treated by bioremediation using microorganisms. For eg. Heavy metals such as cadmium and lead are not readily absorbed or captured by microorganisms.
Statement 3 is correct: The use of genetic engineering to create organisms specifically designed for bioremediation has great potential. For e.g. Alcanivorax, a bacteria with oil-eating abilities, can be used to create species that are much more capable of cleaning oil spills.




NOTE: UPSC asks standard conceptual questions on Eco-engineering every year. Bioremediation, biofuels, and genetic engineering are some such standard concepts. Hence, conceptual clarity of this particular topic is very important. Also, always be cautious of extreme statements and words such as ‘readily’ (quickly) and ‘completely’.**

---

### Question 6

It is possible to produce algae-based biofuels, but what is/are the likely limitation(s) of developing countries in promoting this industry?

1. Production of algae-based biofuels is possible in seas only and not on continents.

2. Setting up and engineering the algae-based biofuels production requires high level of expertise/technology until the construction is

3. Economically viable production necessitates the setting up of large-scale facilities which may raise ecological and social concerns.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Eco-Engineering
Biofuels

A biofuel is any hydrocarbon fuel that is created in a short amount of time—days, weeks, or even months—from organic matter (living or once-living material).
Biofuels may be solid, liquid or gaseous in nature:

Solid: Wood, dried plant material, and manure
Liquid: Bioethanol and Biodiesel
Gaseous: Biogas



Statement 1 is incorrect: Algaculture (farming algae) can be initiated on land unsuitable for agriculture or saline water or wastewater.
Statement 2 is correct: Producing algae for biofuels (excluding simple seaweed production) requires significant capital investments, which may be a significant barrier in developing countries that have a weak investment climate.
Statement 3 is correct: Using the land allotted to food crops to algal biofuel reduces the amount of food available for humans, resulting in an increased cost for both the food and the fuel produced. This is an ecological as well as economic concern.**

---

### Question 7

In the context of mitigating the impending global warming due to anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide, which of the following can be potential sites for carbon sequestration?

Abandoned and uneconomic coal seams
Depleted oil and gas reservoirs
Subterranean deep saline formations

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Global warming mitigation/Carbon sequestration
Option (d) is the correct answer: All are potential sites for carbon sequestration.
Carbon Sequestration:

Carbon sequestration is a process to capture and store CO2 to curb global It is captured from the air, industries or power stations and stored permanently underground.

Types of CO2 Sequestration:

Terrestrial Carbon Sequestration: It is the process through which CO2 from the atmosphere is absorbed by trees and plants through photosynthesis and stored as carbon in soils and biomass (tree trunks, branches, foliage, and roots)
Geologic Carbon Sequestration: CO2 can be stored, including oil reservoirs, gas reservoirs, unmineable coal seams, saline formations and shale formations with high organic content.
Ocean Carbon Sequestration: Oceans absorb, release and store large amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere.

Statement 1 is correct: Uneconomic coal seams can be used to store CO2 because the CO2 molecules attach to the surface of coal.
Statement 2 is correct: CO2 is sometimes injected into declining oil fields to increase oil recovery.
Statement 3 is correct: Other potential sites are gas reservoirs, saline formations and shale formations with high organic content.




NOTE: UPSC has asked about “potential sites”. If we see options, all the given options could be potential sites for carbon sequestration. It is always advisable to stay focused while reading questions and try to identify such keywords from the given questions.**

---

### Question 8

In India, if a species of tortoise is declared protected under Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, what does it imply?

- (a) It enjoys the same level of protection as the tiger.
- (b) It no longer exists in the wild, a few individuals are under captive protection; and not it is impossible to prevent its extinction.
- (c) It is endemic to a particular region of India.
- (d) Both (b) and (c) stated above are correct in this context.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Environmental Laws
Schedule I covers endangered species that need rigorous protection. The species are granted protection from poaching, killing, trading etc. It enjoys the same level of protection as the Bengal tiger.
Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972:

The Act was passed in order to safeguard various plant and animal species.
Except for the State of Jammu & Kashmir, it covers the entirety of India.
Prior to this legislation, India had only five designated national parks.
At present, there are 101 National Parks in**

---

### Question 9

According to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, which of the following animals cannot be hunted by any person except under some provisions provided by law?

Gharial
Indian wild ass
Wild buffalo

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Environmental Laws
Option (d) is the correct answer: All are Scheduled I species.
“Schedules and Species under the Act”



Schedules
Parameters
Species


 
 
 
 
Schedule I
•   It covers endangered species that need rigorous protection. The species are granted protection from poaching, killing, trading etc.
•   A person is liable to the harshest penalties for violation of the law under this Schedule.
•   Species under this Schedule are prohibited to be hunted throughout India, except under threat to human life or in case of a disease that is beyond recovery.
The Black Buck; Bengal Tiger; Clouded Leopard; Snow Leopard; Swamp Deer; Himalayan Bear; Asiatic Cheetah; Kashmiri Stag; Fishing Cat; Lion-tailed Macaque; Musk Deer; Rhinoceros; Brow Antlered Deer; Wild Buffalo; Chinkara (Indian Gazelle); Capped Langur; Golden Langur; Hoolock Gibbon; Gharials; Dugong; Great Indian Bustard; Indian Wild Ass; etc.


 
 
 
Schedule II
•   Animals under this list are also accorded high protection with the prohibition on their trade.
•   They cannot be hunted except under threat to human life or if they are suffering from a disease/ disorder that goes beyond recovery.
Assamese Macaque, Pig Tailed Macaque, Stump Tailed Macaque, Bengal Hanuman langur, Himalayan Black Bear, Himalayan Newt/ Salamander, Jackal, Flying Squirrel, Giant Squirrel, Sperm Whale, Indian Cobra, King Cobra


 
 
 
 
Schedule III & IV
•   Species that are not endangered are included under Schedule III and IV.
•   This includes protected species with hunting prohibited but the penalty for any violation is less compared to the first two schedule.
•   These animals can be hunted.




 
 
Schedule III
Chital (spotted deer), Bharal (blue
sheep), Hyena, Nilgai, Sambhar (deer), Sponges


 
Schedule IV
Flamingo, Hares, Falcons, Kingfishers, Magpie, Horseshoes Crabs










 
Schedule V
•   This schedule contains animals that are considered as vermin (small wild animals that carry disease and destroy plants and food).
Common Crows, Fruit Bats, Rats, Mice


 
 
 
Schedule VI
•   It provides for regulation in cultivation of a specified plant and restricts its possession, sale and transportation.
•   Both cultivation and trade of specified plants can only be carried out with prior permission of competent authority.
Beddomes’ cycad (Native to India), Blue Vanda (Blue Orchid), Red Vanda (Red Orchid), Kuth (Saussurea lappa), Slipper orchids (Paphiopedilum spp.), Pitcher plant (Nepenthes khasiana)**

---

### Question 10

With reference to ‘Global Climate Change Alliance’, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. It is an initiative of the European union.

2. It provides technical and financial support to targeted developing countries to integrate climate change into their development policies and budgets.

3. It is coordinated by World Resources Institute (WRI) and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD).

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Global Climate Finance Architecture
Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA)

The GCCA operates through the existing national and international channels for political cooperation and dialogue set up by the European Commission.
By becoming the main project of the Global Climate Change Alliance Plus (GCCA+), GCCA entered a new phase in 2015.
This new phase is marked by new features and a strategic focus on promoting the 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and its Sustainable Development Goals.

Statement 1 is correct: The Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA) is an initiative of the European Union.
Statement 2 is correct: It was launched to strengthen dialogue and cooperation on climate change between the European Union (EU) and developing countries most vulnerable to climate change, in particular, Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS), which are hardest hit by the adverse effects of climate change.
Statement 3 is incorrect: There is no mention of WRI and WBCSD on the official page of GCCA, even though a lot of other institutions are mentioned like FAO, UNDP etc.**

---

### Question 11

Consider the following statements:

1. Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC) to Reduce Short Lived Climate Pollutants is a unique initiative of G2O group of countries.

2. The CCAC focuses on methane, black carbon and hydrofluorocarbons.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Global Climate Finance Architecture
Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC):

The Climate and Clean Air Coalition is a voluntary alliance of governments, intergovernmental organisations, corporations, academic institutions, and organisations from civil society dedicated to enhancing air quality and defending the environment by taking steps to reduce short-lived climate pollutants.

Statement 1 is incorrect: The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the governments of Bangladesh, Canada, Ghana, Mexico, Sweden, and the United States joined forces in 2012 to launch initiatives to handle short-lived climate pollutants as an urgent and collective concern.
Statement 2 is correct: Short-Lived Climate Pollutants include black carbon, methane, tropospheric ozone, and hydro-fluorocarbons.
NOTE: UPSC usually puts such “about us” page questions not with the primary desire of getting correct answers from the aspirants, but rather to eliminate candidates. Now with a calm and composed mind we can make some intelligent guesses to reach the correct answer. Though it’s a bit risky but still if we consider ‘unique’ as an extreme word with G20 then the first statement becomes wrong. And the second statement looks like a factual one with no extreme word like ‘only’, not all but in most cases such type of question ought to be right. Please use due diligence while attempting this method.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following statements in respect of Trade Related Analysis of Fauna and Flora in Commerce (TRAFFIC):

1. TRAFFIC is a bureau under the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).

2. The mission of TRAFFIC is to ensure that trade in wild plants and animals is not a threat to the conservation of nature.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Conservation Agencies/Schemes
/Initiatives
Statement 1 is incorrect: The TRAFFIC, the Wildlife Trade Monitoring Network, is a non- governmental organisation which works to monitor the wildlife trade in the context of both biodiversity conservation and sustainable development. Headquarters: Cambridge, United Kingdom. The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature collaborate on this programme (IUCN).
Statement 2 is correct: It is working globally on the Wildlife trade monitoring network. It specialises in investigating and analysing wildlife trade trends, patterns, impacts and drivers to provide the leading knowledge base on trade in wild animals and plants.
TRAFFIC and India:

Since 1991, TRAFFIC has functioned as a Programme Division of WWF-India, with headquarters in New Delhi.
Since then, it has collaborated closely with the federal, state, and local governments as well as a number of organisations to research, track, and influence action to stop the illicit wildlife trafficking.





NOTE: Conservation agencies/schemes/ initiatives esp. WWF is the favourite topic of UPSC, one example being Earth hour asked in PYQ. Hence, try to cover WWF, TRAFFIC and related websites comprehensively to answer such questions. Reading Shankar will help you to solve this question without much trouble.**

---

### Question 13

From the ecological point of view, which one of the following assumes importance in being a good link between the Eastern Ghats and the Western Ghats?

- (a) Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve
- (b) Nallamala Forest
- (c) Nagarhole National Park
- (d) Seshachalam Biosphere Reserve
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: National Parks/Biosphere Reserve
Option (a) is the correct answer: Sathyaman- galam Tiger Reserve (STR) is situated where the Western and Eastern Ghats converge. This region is home to a sizable tiger population and is adjacent to other landscapes dedicated to protecting tigers, including BRT, Bandipur, Mudumalai, and Nagarahole. The Nilgiri-Eastern Ghats Elephant Reserve includes this area as well. Due to its position, it contains a wide variety of vegetation and animals.
NOTE: UPSC has the habit of picking up options  from  questions  in  its  previous year’s papers and asking new questions after improvising them. Nallamala Forest, Sathyamangalam  Tiger  Reserve,  etc.  are some examples. Hence, it underlines the importance of solving and analysing PYQs.**

---

### Question 14

If you want to see gharials in their natural habitat, which one of the following is the best place to visit?

- (a) Bhitarkanika Mangroves
- (b) Chambal River
- (c) Pulicat Lake
- (d) Deepor Beel
Explanation


**Ans: b          
Sub-Theme: Species (Fauna)
Option (a) is incorrect: Gharials inhabit deep freshwater habitats, not both freshwater and saltwater habitats as inhabited by crocodile species. It is the home of saltwater crocodiles.
Option (b) is correct:   The most important surviving populations of Gharials are within four tributaries of the Ganges River – Girwa, Son, and Chambal Rivers in India and the Rapti- Narayani River in Nepal. The most significant breeding population is within the Chambal River, which spans the Indian states of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh.
Option (c) is incorrect: Pulicat Lake is the second largest brackish water lake or lagoon in India after Chilika Lake. It is located on the border of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu with over 96% of it in Andhra Pradesh and 4% in Tamil Nadu situated on the Coromandel Coast in South India. The lake encompasses Pulicat Lake Bird Sanctuary. The Buckingham Canal, a navigation channel, is part of the lagoon on its western side.
Option (d) is incorrect: Deepor Beel is one of the largest freshwater lakes in Assam and the State’s only Ramsar site besides being an Important Bird Area by Birdlife International. Till date no such credible information has been found in terms of Gharial population in Deepor beel.**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

With reference to ‘Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD)’ sometimes mentioned in the news while forecasting Indian monsoon, which of the following statements is/are correct?

The IOD phenomenon is characterised by a difference in sea surface temperature between tropical Western Indian Ocean and tropical Eastern Pacific Ocean.
An IOD phenomenon can influence an El Nino’s impact on the monsoon.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Indian Ocean Dipole
Statement 1 is incorrect: IOD is the difference in sea surface temperature between two poles or areas i.e. an eastern pole in the eastern Indian Ocean south of Indonesia, and a western pole in the Arabian Sea (western Indian Ocean).
Statement 2 is correct: Negative IOD events are often associated with La Nina and positive IOD events with El Nino.**

---

### Question 2

At one of the place in India, if you stand on the seashore and watch the sea, ‘you will find that the sea water recedes from the shore line a few kilometres and comes back to the shore, twice a day, and you can actually walk on the seafloor when the water recedes.’ This unique phenomenon is seen at

- (a)Bhavnagar
- (b) Bheemunipatnam
- (c) Chandipur
- (d) Nagapattinam
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Basic Trivia
About Chandipur Sea Beach:

A unique phenomenon rarely seen anywhere else, the sea recedes by as much as five kilometres every day on the Chandipur beach in eastern India.
The sea recedes massively from the beach during ebb and returns to fill the emptiness during high tide.
This hide-and-seek of the sea comes to play twice a day and seeing the sea disappear and then return is an unforgettable experience. Thus it is also called the ‘hide-and-seek’ beach.
Chandipur also has the DRDO (Defence Research and Development Organization) Integrated Research Range. In this range ballistic missiles are test-fired.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to river Teesta, consider the following statements:

1. The source of river Teesta is the same as that of Brahmaputra but it flows through Sikkim.

2. River Rangeet originates in Sikkim and it is a tributary of river Teesta.

3. River Teesta flows into Bay of Bengal on the border of India and Bangladesh.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Himalayan River/Drainage
Statement 1 is incorrect: Teesta originates in the Himalayas near Chunthang, Sikkim and flows to the south through West Bengal before entering Bangladesh.
Statement 2 is correct: River Rangeet originates in Sikkim, which is the largest river of Sikkim and also a tributary of river Teesta.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Originally, the river continued southward to empty directly into the Padma River (the main channel of Ganga in Bangladesh) but around 1787 the river changed its course to flow eastward to join the Jamuna river.**

---

### Question 4

Mediterranean Sea is a border of which of the following countries?

Jordan
Iraq
Lebanon
Syria

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 3 and 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: World Map
Mediterranean Sea Bordering countries:

The countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea are Albania, Algeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Slovenia, Spain, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey.**

---

### Question 5

Which of the following is geographically closest to Great Nicobar?

- (a) Sumatra
- (b) Borneo
- (c) Java
- (d) Sri Lanka
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Indian Ocean Region
About Great Nicobar:

Great Nicobar lies on the south of the Nicobar Islands of India and it is the largest island of the Nicobar South of Great Nicobar is the island of Sumatra.
Great Nicobar is closest to The distance between the two places is 1,192 kms.
The distance from Great Nicobar to Borneo is 2,398 kms.
The distance from Great Nicobar to Java stands at 1,817 kms.**

---

### Question 6

If you travel by road from Kohima to Kottayam, what is the minimum number of States within India through which you can travel, including the origin and the destination?

- (a) 6
- (b) 7
- (c) 8
- (d) 9
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: India Map



If travelling by road from Kohima to Kottayam, you need to cross Kohima the capital of Nagaland (origin), Assam, West Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and then through either Tamil Nadu to Kerala (Kottayam-destination), or through AP to Karnataka to Kerala (Kottayam- destination). So the minimum number of States within India through which you can travel, including the origin and the destination is seven (7).**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following statements:

In India, the Himalayas are spread over five states only.
Western Ghats are spread over five states
Pulicat Lake is spread over two States only.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1 and 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: India Map
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Himalayas is spread across 12 Indian States: Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, two districts of Assam namely Dima Hasao and Karbi Anglong and Darjeeling and Kalimpong in West Bengal).
Statement 2 is incorrect: The Western Ghats are spread over six states namely Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Goa, Maharashtra and Gujarat.

Statement 3 is correct: Pulicat Lake is the second largest brackish water lake in India and spreads over the two states namely Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. Large varieties of birds, including painted storks and Grey pelicans, frequent the area every year. Grey Pelican and Painted Stork both are near-threatened species under IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

Which of the following has/have occurred in India after its liberalisation of economic policies in 1991?

Share of agriculture in GDP increased enormously.
Share of India’s exports in world trade increased
FDI inflows increased.
India’s foreign exchange reserves increased enormously.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below:

- (a) 1 and 4 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Economic Reform
Statement 1 is incorrect: India’s agriculture sector has shown a gradual decline in contribution to the Indian economy post-reform. India’s traditional occupation, agriculture, currently makes up only 15% of the GDP, down from 29% in 1991.
Statement 2 is correct: India is seen as a successful exporter of IT software, auto parts, textiles, and engineering goods in the reform period. Thus, the share of India’s exports in world trade increased after its liberalisation of economic policies in 1991.
Statement 3 is correct: The Foreign investments including FDI and FII have increased from about US $ 100 million in 1990-91 to US $ 467 billion in 2012-13.
Statement 4 is correct: The opening up of the economy has led to rapid increase in foreign direct investment and foreign exchange reserves.
NOTE: This question came verbatim from Economics NCERT Class 11 Pg. 48. This highlights the importance of reading and understanding the concepts from NCERTs.**

---

### Question 2

What is/are the advantage/advantages of implementing the ‘National Agriculture Market’ scheme?

It is a pan-India electronic trading portal for agricultural commodities.
It provides the farmers access to nationwide markets, with prices commensurate with the quality of their produce.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Government Policies/e-technology to aid farmers.
Statement 1 is correct: National Agriculture Market (NAM) is a pan-India electronic trading portal which networks the existing APMC mandis to create a unified national market for agricultural commodities.
Statement 2 is correct: NAM promises more options for sale. It would increase farmers’ access to nationwide markets (with prices commensurate with the quality of their produce) through warehouse based sales and thus obviate the need to transport his produce to the mandi.
National Agriculture Market (NAM):
A national market for agricultural commodities is created by connecting the current APMC mandis through the pan-Indian electronic trading portal known as the National Agriculture Market (NAM).
Advantages of e-NAM:
For the Farmers: NAM promises more options for sale. It would increase farmers’ access to nationwide markets (with prices commensurate with the quality of their produce) through warehouse based sales and thus obviate the need to transport his produce to the mandi.
For the Local Trader: NAM provides access to a bigger national market for secondary trading in the mandi/market.
By participating directly in trading at the local mandi/market level through the NAM platform, bulk buyers, processors, exporters, etc. benefit from lower intermediation costs.
All of the major mandis in the States will gradually be incorporated into NAM, ensuring uniform processes for issuing licences, collecting fees, and moving products.
The NAM will also aid in the development of value chains for the nation’s most important agricultural commodities and support the movement and storage of agricultural products in a scientific manner.**

---

### Question 3

Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the ‘Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)?

It decides the RBI’s benchmark interest rates.
It is a 12-member body including the Governor of RBI and is reconstituted every year.
It functions under the chairmanship of the Union Finance Minister.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 2 and 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: a          
Sub-Theme: Inflation Targeting/Banking and NBFCs
Statement 1 is correct: MPC determines the policy interest rate, which is required to achieve the inflation target.
Statement 2 is incorrect: As per the provisions of the RBI Act, Members of the Monetary Policy Committee is a six-member body of which three Members will be from the RBI and the other three Members of MPC will be appointed by the Central Government.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Governor of the Reserve Bank of India is the ex-officio Chairperson of MPC.**

---

### Question 4

What is/are the most likely advantages of implementing ‘Goods and Services Tax’ (GST)?

1. It will replace multiple taxes collected by multiple authorities and will thus create a single market in India.

2. It will drastically reduce the ‘Current Account Deficit’ of India and will enable it to increase its foreign exchange reserves.

3. It will enormously increase the growth and size of the economy of India and will enable it to overtake China in the near future.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Indirect Taxes/GST
Statement 1 is correct: GST is one indirect tax for the whole nation, which will make India one unified common market.
Statement 2 is incorrect: There is no information which says GST will drastically reduce the Current account deficit (CAD) of India.
Statement 3 is incorrect: GST implementation neither ensures enormous growth of the Indian economy nor does it enable India to take over China.
Goods and Services Tax (GST)



Definition
It is a comprehensive tax levied on the manufacture, sale, and consumption of goods and services.


Established
By the 101st Constitutional Amendment Act, on the lines of “One Nation One Tax”.


Powers
The Parliament and the state legislatures have concurrent powers to implement GST


 
 
Features
•   Applicable on supply side
•   Destination based Taxation
•   Dual GST (Centre and the States simultaneously levying tax on a common base.)
•   GST rates to be mutually decided (CGST, SGST & IGST)
•   Multiple Rates


Merged Taxes
Central Value Added Tax, Additional Customs Duty, Special Additional Duty of Customs, Central Sales Tax, Service Tax, State VAT (Sales tax)


Tax Slabs
5%, 12%, 18% and 28%.


 
3-Tiers of GST
1.       Centre levies the CENTRAL GST (CGST)
2.       State levies STATE GST (SGST)
3.       Centre levies INTEGRATED GST (IGST) on transactions


 
IGST
•   When the commodity is produced in one state and is traded to another state (interstate trade).
•   In this case, the share of SGST should go to the consuming state (as the GST is a destination- based tax).


 
 
Compensation
•   Parliament will compensate for any loss faced by the state
•   As per the GST Act, states are guaranteed compensation for any revenue shortfall below 14% growth (base year 2015-16) for the first five years ending 2022.
•   GST compensation is paid using funds specifically collected as compensation cess- is levied on products considered to be sin or luxury goods.


 
Input Tax Credit
•   It is a mechanism to avoid cascading of taxes.
•   It means at the time of paying tax on output, one can reduce the tax one has already paid on inputs and just pay the balance amount.
•   Cross utilisation of input tax credit is available


Reverse Charge Mechanism
•   The receiver becomes liable to pay the tax, i.e., the chargeability gets reversed.
•   Self-invoicing is to be done when you have purchased from an unregistered supplier and such purchase of goods or services falls under reverse charge.






 
 
 
E-Way Bill System
It is an electronic waybill for movement of goods which can be generated on the e-Way Bill Portal
Objective:
•   Facilitate faster movement of goods.
•   Improve the turnaround time of vehicles.
•   It helps track intra-state as well as inter-state movements of goods of value exceeding Rs 50,000, for sales beyond 10 km in the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime.


 
 
Commodities Outside Gst
•   Alcohol for human consumption,
•   Petroleum products,
•   Electricity, The supply of goods to the SEZ,
•   Supply of goods that come under zero rate,
•   Fresh vegetables, fresh milk, cereal, meat etc,
•   Raw materials.


NOTE: Lottery, Gambling and Betting are also Taxable Under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Act, 2017



 



Advantages
Disadvantages


Lesser compliance (returns, maintaining books of record, issuance of invoices).
A limited territory of business.


Limited tax liability.
No Input Tax Credit available to composition dealers


High liquidity as taxes are at a lower rate.
The taxpayer will not be eligible to supply non- taxable goods under GST such as alcohol and goods through an e-commerce portal.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following statements:

Tax revenue as a percent of GDP of India has steadily increased in the last decade.
Fiscal deficit as a percent of GDP of India has steadily increased in the last decade.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Tax Revenue/Fiscal Deficit
Statement 1 is incorrect: Service tax, personal income tax and corporation tax have been reduced in the recent past to boost aggregate demand, so as to protect the economy from global recession. Excise duty rates have recently been lowered in order to raise aggregate demand and safeguard the economy from a worldwide recession; as a result, tax revenue as a percentage of India’s GDP hasn’t increased over the past ten years.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Fiscal deficit as a percent of GDP of India has not steadily increased in the last decade.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to the ‘National Intellectual Property Rights Policy’, consider the following statements:

1. It reiterates India’s commitment to the Doha Development Agenda and the TRIPS

2. Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion is the nodal agency for regulating intellectual property rights in India.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: IP Related issues
Statement 1 is correct: National Intellectual Property Rights Policy was introduced as India’s commitment to the Doha Development Agenda (trade negotiation round of the WTO) and the TRIPS Agreement. It is an international legal agreement between all the member nations of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to provide strong protection for Intellectual Property Rights. It came into effect on 1 January 1995.
Statement 2 is correct: The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) has been nominated as the nodal department to coordinate, guide and oversee implementation and future development of IPRs in India.
National Intellectual Property Rights Policy:

In terms of IP awareness and development, commercialization, and enforcement, it seeks to create an ecosystem in the nation that is supportive of innovation and creativity.
The nodal department has been nominated as being the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP).
This policy was introduced as India’s commitment to the Doha Development Agenda and the TRIPS Agreement.
National Intellectual Property Rights Policy encompasses and brings to a single platform all IPRs. It aims to incorporate and adapt global best practices to the Indian

TRIPS Agreement:

It’s an agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). It is an international legal agreement between all the member nations of the World Trade Organization (WTO). It came into effect on 1 January 1995.**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

Right to vote and to be elected in India is a

- (a) Fundamental Right
- (b) Natural Right
- (c) Constitutional Right
- (d) Legal Right
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Universal Adult Franchise
Constitutional Right:

While framing the Indian Constitution the framers and makers of our Constitution took the decision to guarantee every adult Indian citizen to franchise their vote e., the Right to Vote.
In India, the Right to Vote is provided both by the Indian Constitution and the Representation of People’s Act, 1951.
Article 326: ensures that every individual above the age of 18 has the right to vote.
Section 62 of the Representation of Peoples Act (RoPA), 1951: the right to vote will be available to every person on the electoral roll of that constituency.
61st Constitutional Amendment: lowered the voting age of elections to the Lok Sabha and to the Legislative Assemblies of States from 21 years to 18 years.**

---

### Question 2

Out of the following statements, choose the one that brings out the principle underlying the Cabinet form of Government:

- (a) An arrangement for minimising criticism against the Government whose responsibilities are complex and hard to carry out to the satisfaction of all.
- (b) A mechanism for speeding up the activities of the Government whose responsibilities are increasing day by day.
- (c) A mechanism of parliamentary democracy for ensuring collective responsibility of the Government to the people.
- (d) A device for strengthening the hands of the head of the Government whose hold over the people is in a state of decline.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Forms of Government
Parliamentary System:

The Parliamentary System is also referred to as Cabinet Government. It establishes a system of collective responsibility between the executive and the legislative.
Parliamentary system is part of the basic structure of the
The characteristics of India’s parliamentary system are:

Presence of nominal and real executives i.e., President and Prime minister respectively,
Majority party rule,
Collective responsibility (Swim or Sink together) of the executive to the legislature,
Membership of the ministers in the legislature,
Leadership of the prime minister or the chief minister,
Dissolution of the lower House (Lok Sabha or State Assembly).


It is through these powers that the Parliament enforces the responsibility of the executive to itself and to the people in the ultimate analysis.**

---

### Question 3

Which one of the following is not a feature to Indian federalism?

- (a) There is an independent judiciary in India.
- (b) Powers have been clearly divided between the Centre and the States.
- (c) The federating units have been given unequal representation in the Rajya Sabha.
- (d) It is the result of an agreement among the federating units.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Forms of Government

Option (a), (b) and (c) are correct: The Indian Constitution adopts the federal system of Government, but with more tilt towards a unitary system of government. So, every state government does not have power of its own. Thus, it is considered as a quasi-federal system.
The features of a federation are:

Two Government,
Division of powers,
Written Constitution,
Supremacy of Constitution,
Rigidity of Constitution,
Independent judiciary,
Bicameralism


Option (d) is incorrect: The phrase ‘Union of States’ has been preferred to ‘Federation of States’ for two reasons: One, unlike the American Federation (“Indestructible union of indestructible states”), the Indian Federation (“Indestructible union of destructible states”) is not the outcome of an agreement among the states; and two, the states are not permitted to secede the
Due to its invincibility, the federation is a Union. The country is a union that cannot be broken, although states can be split up and reorganised by changing their borders. State names and borders may be changed by the central government without their consent. B. R. Ambedkar described India as an “indestructible Union of destructible states” for this reason.**

---

### Question 4

The main advantage of the parliamentary form of governments is that:

- (a) the executive and legislature work independently
- (b) it provides continuity of policy and is more efficient.
- (c) the executive remains responsible to the legislature.
- (d) the head of the government cannot be changed without election.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Forms of Government
Parliamentary System:

The Parliamentary system is also known as the Cabinet Government/Responsible government/Westminster model of government. It provides for collective responsibility of the executive to the
The features of parliamentary government in India are:

Presence of nominal and real executives.
Majority party rule,
Collective responsibility of the executive to the legislature,
Membership of the ministers in the legislature,
Leadership of the prime minister or the chief minister,
Dissolution of the lower House (Lok Sabha or Assembly).**

---

### Question 5

Which one of the following objectives is not embodied in the Preamble to the Constitution of India?

- (a) Liberty of thought
- (b) Economic liberty
- (c) Liberty of expression
- (d) Liberty of belief
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Key Words in the Preamble
Liberty as mentioned in the Preamble:

This ideal of ‘liberty’ in the Preamble to the Indian Constitution was borrowed from the French revolution.
It means the absence of restraints on the activities of individuals and at the same time, it provides opportunities for the development of individuals.
The preamble to the Indian Constitution assures to all citizens-

liberty of thought,
liberty of expression, liberty of belief, liberty of faith and worship Justice as mentioned in the Preamble:


The ideal of justice in the Indian Constitution embraces three distinct forms- social, economical and political:

Social Justice: the equal treatment of all citizens without any social discrimination.
Economic Justice: It calls for the non- discrimination between people on the basis of economic factors.
Political justice: It calls for equal access to political office, equal political rights, and equal voice in the government for all citizens.**

---

### Question 6

The mind of the makers of the Constitution of India is reflected in which of the following?

- (a) The Preamble
- (b) The Fundamental Rights
- (c) The Directive Principles of State Policy
- (d) The Fundamental Duties
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Significance of the Preamble
Option (a) is correct: The Preamble:

Though India followed the practice of the American Constitution, the preamble to the Indian Constitution embodies the basic philosophy and the fundamental values on which our constitution is based.
It is not only the outcome of the grand and noble vision of the Constituent Assembly, but also the reflection of the dreams and aspirations of the founding fathers of the
In the Berubari Union case (1960), the Supreme Court opined that the Preamble is “a key to the minds of the makers of the ”

Option (b) is incorrect: Fundamental Rights:

The framers and makers of the Constitution derived inspiration of ‘fundamental rights’ from the Constitution of the USA (Bill of Rights) and also from the Motilal Nehru committee Report 1928. It was meant for promoting the ideal of political democracy.

Option (c) is incorrect: Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP):

It resembles the ‘Instrument of Instructions’ enumerated in GoI Act 1935. They are intended to fill in the vacuum in Part III by providing for social and economic

Option (d) is incorrect: Fundamental Duties:

Inspired from the erstwhile USSR, the Fundamental Duties were added to the Constitution by 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1976.**

---

### Question 7

Which of the following are envisaged by the Right against Exploitation in the Constitution of India?

1. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour

2. Abolition of untouchability

3. Protection of the interests of minorities

4. Prohibition of employment of children in factories and mines

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 1 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Right against Exploitation
Statement 1 is correct: As under article 23 (Right Against Exploitation) of the constitution, the expression ‘traffic in human beings’ includes: Selling and buying of men, women and children like goods, Immoral traffic in women and children, including prostitution, Devadasis, Slavery.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Abolition of Untouchability is provided in the constitution of India, but it comes under Right to Equality, under article 17.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Cultural and Educational Rights (under articles 29 and 30) cover protection of interests of minorities; they don’t come under Rights Against Exploitation.
Statement 4 is correct: Article 24 (Right Against Exploitation) ensures prohibition of employment of children in factories etc. The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 was enacted to provide for the establishment of a National Commission and State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights and Children’s Courts for providing speedy trial of offences against children or of violation of child rights.



NOTE: Here option 4 is present in all given options. Observing such things will save your time and lessen the chances of error.**

---

### Question 8

In the context of India, which one of the following is the correct relationship between Rights and Duties?

- (a) Rights are correlative with duties.
- (b) Rights are personal and hence independent of society and Duties.
- (c) Rights, not Duties, are important for the advancement of the personality of the citizen.
- (d) Duties, not Rights, are important for the stability of the State.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Correlation between Rights and Duties

In the context of India, Rights are correlative with duties, considering the Indian political set up.
In a constitutional democracy (such as India), the State provides rights and lays down duties for the citizenry, so that society can peacefully However, sometimes the State imposes such duties on its citizens that infringes the rights of the marginalised sections of society.
Rights and duties have an organic relationship. If others do not carry out their duties, one cannot enjoy a right.
For Example: One’s right to life implies that others should give protection and security to the former’s Similarly, One cannot enjoy their Right to a clean environment if others do not perform their duty of protecting and conserving the environment.**

---

### Question 9

One of the implications of equality in society is the absence of:

- (a) Privileges
- (b) Restraints
- (c) Competition
- (d) Ideology
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Right to Equality
Equality in the society can be maintained by ending the formal system of inequality and ensuring absence of privileges. The lack of any special privileges for any individual is a concept related to Equality Before Law (which is an American Concept and denotes positive notion). This concept entails equal subjection of all persons to the ordinary law of the land administered by ordinary law courts, and no one is above the law, regardless of their status (rich or poor, high or low, official or not).
Additional Information:

Absence of Restraint does not necessarily imply equality in society as restraining the actions of the society curtails the liberty of the individual.
Absence of Competition in society may result in monopoly, which would not imply equality, rather inequality in the society.
Absence of ideology does not imply equality in society. Ideology is a set of principles or beliefs of a group/institution in the society.**

---

### Question 10

Which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) Rights are claims of the State against the citizens.
- (b) Rights are privileges which are incorporated in the Constitution of a State.
- (c) Rights are claims of the citizens against the State.
- (d) Rights are privileges of a few citizens against the many.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Rights of Citizen
Option (a) is incorrect: Rights are claimed by the citizens against the state and not the vice versa.
Option (b) is incorrect: Rights are not privileges either, they are one of the quintessential requirements for the formation of a democratic state. Thus, the constitution has no concept of special privileges which will create inequality in the society.
Option (c) is correct: The philosophy of rights is grounded in preventing the exploitation of the citizen by the state. It inherently belongs to the citizens. So, essentially it is the claim of an individual against the state.
Option (d) is incorrect: As per Article 18, except for military and academic distinctions, no other citizens have titular privileges. Hence, Rights are not the privileges of a few citizens as they are equally available to all.**

---

### Question 11

Which principle among the following was added to the Directive Principles of State Policy by the 42nd Amendment to the Constitution?

- (a) Equal pay for equal work for both men and women
- (b) Participation of workers in the management of industries
- (c) Right to work, education and public assistance
- (d) Securing living wage and human conditions of work to workers
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Amendments to Constitution

42nd Amendment Act of 1976 added four new Directive Principles to the original list, and they are –

Article 39: To secure opportunities for healthy development of children
Article 39 A: To promote equal justice and to provide free legal aid to the poor.
Article 43 A: To take steps to secure the participation of workers in the management of industries.
Article 48 A: To protect and improve the environment and to safeguard forests and wildlife.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following statements:

With reference to the Constitution of India, the Directive Principles of State Policy constitute limitations upon

1. legislative

2. executive

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Features of the Directive Principles

DPSP: The directive principles are in the nature of instruments of instruction to the government of the day to achieve certain ends by their actions. Directive Principles of State Policy does not impose any limitations on any organ of the State. It is a guideline that the government of the day can use for the welfare of the socially and economically backward classes while framing any rules.
Fundamental Rights: It is the fundamental rights that constitute limitations upon state action (whether legislative or executive).**

---

### Question 13

Which of the following statements is/are true of the Fundamental Duties of an Indian citizen?

1. A legislative process has been provided to enforce these duties.

2. They are correlative to legal duties.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Basics of Fundamental Duties
Statement 1 is incorrect: Fundamental Duties are enumerated in Part IV-A and consists of single Article 51A with 11 sub-articles. These duties should guide the legislative and executive actions of elected or non-elected institutions and organisations of the citizens including the municipal bodies. But no legislative process has been provided to enforce these duties. These duties are thus non-enforceable and non- justiciable in nature.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The fundamental Duties are not correlative of the legal duties. Parliament may provide legislation for the imposition of penalty or punishment for non- observance or infringement of duties.
NOTE: Fundamental Duties are confined to citizens only & not to foreigners.**

---

### Question 14

Which of the following are not necessarily the consequences of the proclamation of the President’s rule in a State?

1. Dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly

2. Removal of the Council of Ministers in the State

3. Dissolution of the local bodies

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: State Emergency/President’s Rule
Statement 1 is correct: The proclamation of the President’s Rule is also known as ‘State Emergency’ or ‘Constitutional Emergency’. As per article 356 of the Constitution of India, the president has the authority to declare if he is satisfied that the state government cannot function in accordance with the Constitution’s provisions. (The President can act on the report of the governor or otherwise). But the ground for Dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly is not necessarily the consequence of proclamation.
Statement 2 is incorrect: When the President’s Rule is imposed in a state, the President dismisses the state council of ministers headed by the chief minister.
Statement 3 is correct: There is no mention of Dissolution of the local bodies during the proclamation of President’s Rule.**

---

### Question 15

Democracy’s superior virtue lies in the fact that it calls into activity

- (a) the intelligence and character of ordinary men and women.
- (b) the methods for strengthening executive leadership.
- (c) a superior individual with dynamism and vision.
- (d) a band of dedicated party workers.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Basic Idea of Democracy (Conceptual)
The basic idea of democracy is the desire, approval and participation of people. A democratic government is created, and its operations are decided by the will of the people. It is the decision of people that creates a democratic government and decides about its functioning. Therefore, democracy requires voters’ decision making – hence, intelligence and character are called in.**

---

### Question 16

For election to the Lok Sabha, a nomination paper can be filed by:

- (a) anyone residing in India.
- (b) a resident of the constituency from which the election is to be contested.
- (c) any citizen of India whose name appears in the electoral roll of a constituency.
- (d) any citizen of India.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Qualification of Lok Sabha
There are some qualification criteria mentioned in the Indian Constitution for filing the nomination for Lok Sabha election and those are –

The candidate must be a citizen of
The age of the candidate should not less than 25 years of age
The candidate must be registered as an elector for a parliamentary constituency.




NOTE: This a straightforward question, a proper reading of M. Laxmikanth could help in giving the answer.**

---

### Question 17

Consider the following statements:

1. In the election for Lok Sabha or State Assembly, the winning candidate must get at least 50 percent of the votes polled, to be declared elected.

2. According to the provisions laid down in the Constitution of India, in Lok Sabha, the Speaker’s post goes to the majority party and the Deputy Speaker’s to the Opposition.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: People’s Representative/Speaker and Deputy Speaker
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Indian constitution adopts the first-past-the-post (FPTP) system of elections where the majority of votes is sufficient to get elected, even if it is less than 50% of the total votes polled.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Speaker and Deputy speaker are elected by the house. This is a convention (not constitutional provision) that usually the Speaker’s post goes to the majority party and the Deputy Speaker’s to the Opposition.**

---

### Question 18

The Parliament of India exercises control over the functions of the Council of Ministers through

1. Adjournment motion

2. Questions hour

3. Supplementary questions

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Devices of Parliamentary Proceedings
Devices Of Parliamentary Proceeding

Adjournment Motion: It is introduced to draw attention of the House to a definite matter of urgent public importance which is definite, factual, urgent, matter of recent
Question Hour: In the First Hour of parliamentary sitting usually members ask questions and ministers give answers but sometimes questions can be asked to private members too.
Three types of Question are asked namely–

Starred Question: Require oral answer and Supplementary question can be
Unstarred Question: Require written answer and Supplementary question cannot be asked.
Short Notice Question: Answered orally and asked on short notice of less than 10 days.



Thus, Adjournment Motion, Question Hour and Supplementary Question, all constitutes devices of the Parliament of India through which it exercises control over the functions of the Council of Ministers.**

---

### Question 19

With reference to the Parliament of India, consider the following statements:

1. A private member’s bill is a bill presented by a Member of Parliament who is not elected but only nominated by the President of India.

2. Recently, a private member’s bill has been passed in the Parliament of India for the first time in its history.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Legislative Procedure of Parliament
Statement 1 is incorrect: A Private Member bill can be introduced by any member of the Parliament other than a minister. Whereas, a bill introduced by a Minister in the Parliament is called a public bill. A Private member bill generally reflects the stand of the opposition party on public matters. There is less likelihood that the Parliament will adopt it. Its rejection by the House has no implication on the parliamentary confidence in the government or its resignation.
Statement 2 is incorrect: As of now around 14 private member’s bills have been passed since independence in Indian Parliament.**

---

### Question 20

In India, Judicial Review implies:

- (a) the power of the Judiciary to pronounce upon the constitutionality of laws and executive orders.
- (b) the power of the Judiciary to question the wisdom of the laws enacted by the Legislatures.
- (c) the power of the Judiciary to review all the legislative enactments before they are assented to by the President.
- (d) the power of the Judiciary to review its own judgements given earlier in similar or different cases
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Judicial Review
Judicial Review:

In general terms, judicial review refers to the power and ability of High Courts and Supreme Court to review laws or judgments to ensure that they do not violate constitutional or legal provisions.

Article 13: states that, Courts can review government orders, legislations, byelaw, rule, regulation, notification or any law in force in Indian Territory.
Article 32/Article 226: allows a person to move to SC/HC in case of violation of fundamental rights. Thus, SC & HC can issue writs as constitutional remedies against the wrongdoer.
Article 137: empowers SC to review judgments or orders made by the Supreme Court itself. The review will be done by a larger bench of SC.
Article 142: allows the Supreme Court to pass such a decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it.


Primarily, Article 13, 32 and 226 forms the core of judicial review, of which Article 13 and 32 forms part of Fundamental Right.
Further judicial review has also been considered as part of basic structure of the Indian Constitution and hence cannot be amended.
Thus, the Courts are empowered to declare a statute ultra vires the constitution and to nullify an executive action as unconstitutional if they violate constitutional provisions or alter fundamental rights.
These powers of judicial review are given not to make the judiciary superior, but to ensure a system of checks and balances between the legislature and the executive on one hand, and the judiciary on the**

---

### Question 21

Local self-government can be best explained as an exercise in

- (a) Federalism
- (b) Democratic decentralisation
- (c) Administrative delegation
- (d) Direct democracy
Explanation


**Ans: b      
Sub-Theme: Objective of Local Governance
Option (b) is correct: The main idea behind the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) or Local Self-Government is to promote grass root democracy and development. The main aim is to evolve a system of democratic decentralisation and people’s participation with a view to ensure rapid socio-economic progress and provide adequate justice.
NOTE: Phrase to emphasis here is “Best”. Democratic decentralisation is the best description of Local self-government. Balwant Rai Mehta committee (on Community Development Program) in 1957 recommended the establishment of a scheme of Democratic decentralisation with 3-tiered structure of PRI.**

---

### Question 22

Consider the following statements:

1. The Election Commission of India is a five- member body.

2. The Union Ministry of Home Affairs decides the election schedule for the conduct of both general elections and bye-elections.

3. Election Commission resolves the disputes relating to splits/mergers of recognized political

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Election Commission of India
Statement 1 is Incorrect: Strength of ECI is not specified in the Constitution, it is at the discretion of the President. Currently, there are 3 Members.
Statement 2 is Incorrect: The most important function of the commission is to decide the election schedules for the conduct of periodic and timely elections, whether general or bye- elections.
Statement 3 is Correct: It grants recognition to political parties & allot election symbols to them along with settling disputes related to it.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

Who among the following was/were associated with the introduction of Ryotwari Settlement in India during the British Rule?

Lord Cornwallis
Alexander Read
Thomas Munro

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Land Revenue Settlement



Permanent Settlement


Started by Lord Cornwallis in 1793.
Prevalent in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Varanasi (United Provinces), and Northern Karnataka.
Covered 19% of British India.
A new section of Zamindars was appointed who would provide 10/11th part of the revenue collected to the British while keeping the remaining.




 
 
Ryotwari System


Started by Thomas Munro and Alexander Reed in 1820.
Started in the Baramahal district of Tamil Nadu and later spread to Madras, parts of Bombay, East Bengal, Assam and Kurg (Karnataka).
Covered 51% of British India.
Ryots (farmers) were given ownership and other rights over the land and were required to pay the revenue directly to the government. Involved high taxes and strict collection.




 
 
Mahalwari System


The Mahalwari system was introduced by Holt Mackenzie in 1822.
Prevalent in United Provinces, Central Provinces and Punjab.
Covered 30% of British India.
The village or mahal served as the unit for collecting revenue. Village land belonged to the community and it was the responsibility of the entire community to pay the land revenue.





 



NOTE: Questions on the settlement system earlier came in 2011 and two questions in 2012. Reference of PYQs and research about given options stands important.**

---

### Question 2

. The Trade Disputes Act of 1929 provided for:

- (a) the participation of workers in the management of industries.
- (b) arbitrary powers to the management to quell industrial disputes.
- (c) an intervention by the British Court in the event of a trade dispute.
- (d) a system of tribunals and a ban on strikes.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Labour Legislations
About the Trade Disputes Act, 1929:

The Trade Disputes Act, 1929 was codified for five years as an experimental measure.
The main objective of the Act was to make provisions for the establishment of Courts of Inquiry and Boards of Conciliation with a view to investigate and settle trade disputes.
The Act banned unnoticed strikes or lockouts in the provision of public utility services.
A strike or lockout that was intended to cause severe, widespread, or prolonged hardship for the community and compel the government to take or refrain from taking a particular course of action was also made illegal.
This included strikes and lockouts that had any purpose other than to advance a trade dispute within the trade or industry in which the strikers or the employers locking out were engaged.
The Act was amended in 1932 and was made permanent by the Trade Disputes (Extending) Act, 1934.**

---

### Question 3

. Consider the following statements:

The Factories Act, 1881 was passed with a view to fix the wages of industrial workers and to allow the workers to form trade unions.
M. Lokhande was a pioneer in organizing the labour movement in British India.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Labour Legislations/Labour Movement
Statement 1 is incorrect: The first Factory Act (1881) was passed in 1881 during the tenure of Lord Ripon. This legislation aimed to improve working conditions for factory workers. This act applies only to factories that use mechanical power, employing at least 100 workers. It prohibited employment of children under the age 7. Children between the ages 7-12 were to work for a maximum 9 hours. It also made compulsory that dangerous machinery should be fenced properly, but no mention of forming trade unions.
Statement 2 is correct: Narayan Meghaji Lokhande (1848–1897) was the father of the trade union movement in India. He is remembered not only for ameliorating the working conditions of textile mill-hands in the 19th century but also for his courageous initiatives on caste and communal issues. Lokhande is acclaimed as the Father of the Trade Union Movement in India. Some of the rights mill workers got because of N M Lokhande were:

Mill workers should get a weekly holiday on Sunday
In the afternoon, workers should be entitled to half-hour recess.
The mill should start working from 6:30 in the morning and close by sunset.
The salaries of the workers should be given by the 15th of every month.




NOTE: From NCERT, we know that N.M. Lokhande was a pioneer of the labour movement in India and widely regarded as the “father of the trade union movement”. He also founded “Mill Hands’ Association”. If we critically think about statement 1, it states that Factories Act, 1881 allows the workers to form trade unions. It was the very first Factories Act, 1881. Do you think Britishers would give such a heavy right in its very first act rather than incremental moves? This reasoning makes the possibility of statement 1 being incorrect.
Read carefully about various personalities, at least about those which are mentioned in Modern NCERT. Personalities from Swadeshi Movement, Non-Cooperation Movement, CDM, Quit India Movement (esp. Underground activities) and various socio- religious reform movements are important.**

---

### Question 4

In the context of Indian history, the principle of ‘dyarchy (diarchy)’ refers to:

- (a) division of the central Legislature into two houses.
- (b) introductions of double Government e., central and Statement governments.
- (c) having two sets of rulers; One in London and another in Delhi.
- (d) division of the subjects delegated to the provinces into two categories.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Administrative Reforms post 1857/ Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms/GoI Act 1919
Government of India Act/Montagu-Chelmsford Act, 1919 divided the provincial subjects into two parts: transferred and reserved, this dual scheme of governance was known as ‘dyarchy’.
Introduction to Diarchy:

The GoI Act 1919 introduced a diarchy (rule of two individuals/parties) for the executive at the level of the provincial government.
The diarchy was implemented in eight provinces: Assam, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Central Provinces, United Provinces, Bombay, Madras and Punjab.
The Dyarchy system increased the authority of the provincial governments.
In the province, the governor was to serve as the chief executive.

Division of Subjects:

Division of subjects into two lists: ‘reserved’ and ‘transferred’.
The reserved list: included subjects such as law and order, finance, land revenue, irrigation and the subjects were to be administered by the governor through his executive council of bureaucrats. All significant subjects were maintained in the Provincial Executive’s reserved subjects.
The transferred subjects: were to be administered by ministers nominated from among the elected members of the legislative council and it included subjects such as education, health, local government, industry, agriculture, excise, etc.





NOTE: UPSC has asked several questions from this particular theme/sub-theme, thus aspirants are requested to read this particular theme very minutely both from Spectrum and Laxmikanth.**

---

### Question 5

The object of the Butler Committee of 1927 was to:

- (a) Define the jurisdiction of the Central and Provincial Governments.
- (b) Define the powers of the Secretary of State for India.
- (c) Impose censorship on national Press.
- (d) Improve the relationship between the Government of India and the Indian States.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Important Commission during British
Butler Committee (1927):

The Butler Committee was appointed under the chairmanship of Sir Harcourt Butler in 1927 to investigate and clarify the relationship between the paramount power of the British Raj in India, and the rulers of Princely States.
There were two other members of the committee: William Searle Holdsworth and Sidney Peel.

Recommendations:

In the committee’s report of 1929, the “paramountcy” doctrine was reaffirmed.
Guidelines were given for its application, and it was made clear that the financial relationship between the Raj and the States should be fair.
The relationship of the princely states with the British empire was not merely a contractual relationship, but a living, growing relationship shaped by the circumstances and policy, resting on the mixture of history and theory.
British paramountcy to stay intact(solid) to preserve the princely state.
State should not be transferred without their own consent to a relationship with a new government in British India responsible to an Indian legislature.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to Indian freedom struggle, consider the following events:

Mutiny in Royal Indian Navy
Quit India Movement launched
Second Round Table Conference

What is the correct chronological sequence of the above events?

- (a) 1-2-3
- (b) 2-1-3
- (c) 3-2-1
- (d) 3-1-2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Last phase of Indian Freedom Struggle/RIN Movement
Second Round Table Conference (1931):

In London, between September 7, 1931 to December 1, 1931.
Result of the Gandhi-Irwin 
Gandhi was the sole representative of the
Madan Mohan Malviya and A. Rangaswami Iyengar were also there.
Muslim league represented by Aga Khan III, Maulana Mohammad Jinnah.
Depressed classes by B. R. Ambedkar, Rettamalai Srinivasan, Sardar Sampuran Singh etc.
Sarojini Naidu participated to represent
Lord Willingdon was the viceroy of
A Communal Award for representing minorities in India by providing for separate electorates for minority communities. Gandhi was against this.
The government refused Indian demands and talks failed.

Quit India Movement/August Revolution (1942):

After the failure of Cripps’s Mission, a Resolution was framed by Gandhiji for British withdrawal and  non-violent Non-Cooperation Movement against the Japanese Invasion.
The resolution was accepted in the CWC meeting in Wardha on July 14, 1942.

Royal Indian Naval Mutiny (1946):

On February 18, 1946, a mutiny started among the ratings of HMIS Talwar due to poor pay, inadequate food, and racial
The Muslim League, Congress, and CPI’s red flags were raised.
The intervention of Sardar Patel put an end to the rebellion. The mutineers faced trials despite promises.
This led to Violence in Bombay, with the loss of 200 lives.
Significance: On February 19, 1946, a Cabinet Mission was sent to India.




NOTE: this question underscores the importance of understanding chain of events and remembering relative timeline. In 2021, UPSC asked what happened on the 8th Aug 1942. So it is advisable to remember the chronology of important events.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following pairs:

Radhakanta Deb – first President of the British Indian Association
Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty – founder of the Madras Mahajan Sabha
Surendranath Banerjee – Founder of the Indian Association

Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b        
Sub-Theme: Social Movement Organisations

Pair 1 is correct: Raja Radhakanta Deb was the first President of the British Indian Association while Debendranath Tagore was its secretary.
Pair 2 is incorrect: In 1884 Madras Mahajan Sabha  was established by M. Veeraraghavachariar, G. Subramania Iyer and P. Anandacharlu.
Pair 3 is correct: Surendranath Banerjee and Anand  Mohan  Bose  founded  the Indian Association of Calcutta in 1876.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

What is the application of Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer Technology?

- (a) Production of biolarvicides
- (b) Manufacture of biodegradable plastics
- (c) Reproductive cloning of animals
- (d) Production of organisms free of diseases
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub Theme: Application of Biotechnology
The most practical application of Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is in the reproductive cloning of farm animals that have exceptional qualities, such as the ability to produce large quantities of milk.
Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer Technology

The most practical application of Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is in the reproductive cloning of farm animals that have exceptional qualities, such as the ability to produce large quantities of milk.
A somatic (body) cell’s nucleus is transferred to the cytoplasm of an enucleated egg(an egg that has had its own nucleus removed) using the somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) procedure .
The SCNT-derived blastocyst used in reproductive cloning is implanted into the uterus of a surrogate mother, where it develops into a foetus and is carried to
The first mammal to be cloned via SCNT was a sheep named Dolly, who was born in 1996. The method might potentially be used to bring back extinct animals; for instance, frozen woolly mammoth cells could be employed as nuclear donors for enucleated elephant eggs.**

---

### Question 2

.

With reference to agriculture in India, how can the technique of ‘genome sequencing’, often seen in the news, be used in the immediate future?

1.Genome sequencing can be used to identify genetic markers for disease resistance and drought tolerance in various crop plants.

2.This technique helps in reducing the time required to develop new varieties of crop plants.

3.It can be used to decipher the host pathogen relationships in crops.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Genome sequencing
Genome Sequencing is figuring the sequence of DNA bases(nucleotides), such as As, Cs, Gs, and Ts that make up an organism’s DNA. These genetic letters total more than 3 billion and make up the human genome.

Statement 1 is correct: The identification of genetic markers for disease resistance and drought tolerance in different crop plants can be done via genome sequencing.
Statement 2 is correct: Genome sequencing is a method that will aid in genetic engineering and speed up the process of creating new crop plant kinds.
Statement 3 is correct: It also includes research on host-pathogen interactions in agricultural systems, like that of genes related to insecticide Resistance in Bactrocera dorsalis.**

---

### Question 3

Consider the following pairs:

Commonly used
 Unwanted or consumed materials  controversial  chemicals  likely  to  be found in them


1. Lipstick
Lead


2. Soft drinks
Brominated vegetable oils


3. Chinese fast
Monosodium food glutamate

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Harmful chemicals

Pair 1 is correct: Lip items like lipsticks and other cosmetics including eye shadow, blush, compact powder, shampoo, and body lotion frequently include the contaminant 
Pair 2 is correct: In some sodas and soft drinks, the citrus flavour is sometimes prevented from breaking out by the food additive brominated vegetable oil. In Europe and Japan, it is prohibited as a food
Pair 3 is correct: A “non-essential” amino acid called glutamate, or glutamic acid salt, is what is known as monosodium glutamate (MSG). It transmits messages from one nerve cell to another as a neurotransmitter. It has “neuro-excitatory qualities,” which means it can stimulate neurons, because it is supposed to improve flavours. It is frequently utilised in fast food that is Chinese.**

---

### Question 4

Organic Light Emitting Diodes (OLEDs) are used to create digital displays in many devices. What are the advantages of OLED displays over Liquid Crystal displays?

OLED displays can be fabricated on flexible plastic
Roll-up displays embedded in clothing can be made using OLEDs.
Transparent displays are possible using OLEDs.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None of the above statements is correct
Explanation


**Ans: c
Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Digital Technology

Statement 1 is correct: Regular OLEDs are usually fabricated on a glass substrate, but by replacing glass with a flexible plastic such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) among others, OLEDs can be made both bendable and lightweight.
Statement 2 is correct: OLED displays can be fabricated on flexible plastic substrates leading to the possible fabrication of flexible organic light-emitting diodes for other new applications, such as roll-up displays embedded in fabrics or clothing.
Statement 3 is correct: LCD technology engages a backlight, whereas OLED has no backlighting function. Hence it can be used for making transparent displays.**

---

---

