# UPSC Prelims 2019 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

Which one of the following is not a Harappan site?

- (a) Chanhudaro
- (b) Kot Diji
- (c) Sohgaura
- (d) Desalpur
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Location of Harappan site
Option (c) is correct: Sohgaura is located in Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. Here Ashokan inscriptions were found. The Sohgaura copper plate inscription is an Indian copper plate inscription written in Prakrit in the Brahmi script. It was found at Sohgaura, about 20 kilometres to the southeast of Gorakhpur, on the banks of the Rapti River.
 
Option (a), (b), (d) are incorrect: Kot Diji, Desalpur and Chanhudaro are Harappan sites. Kotdiji means “Fort of the Daughter’’ and is located in Khairpur province, Pakistan. Here copper-bronze objects, bangles and arrowheads; etched carnelian and other beads and numerous terracotta human, bull, and bird effigy figurines were found. At Desalpur houses built next to walls have been found. Chanhudaro is located on the bank of the Indus River in Sindh, Pakistan. Bead makers’ shops have been found here.



NOTE: Reference to question came from the news of Sohgaura copper plate inscription found in 2018-19.**

---

### Question 2

In which of the following relief sculpture inscriptions is ‘Ranyo Ashoka’ (King Ashoka) mentioned along with the stone portrait of Ashoka?

- (a) Kanganahalli
- (b) Sanchi
- (c) Shahbazgarhi
- (d) Sohgaura
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Ashoka and sites (location) of his inscriptions
The correct answer is Option (a): Kanaganahalli is in Gulbarga, Karnataka. In this sculptural depiction, the emperor with his queen and attendants are carved on a slab, with “Ranyo Ashoka” (King Ashoka) mentioned along with the stone portrait of Ashoka.
About Sannati and Kanaganahalli Buddhist Sites:

About 3 kilometres from Sannati lies Kanganahalli, a significant Buddhist site where an old Mahastupa was erected.
It is located in India’s Karnataka on the left bank of the Bhima River in the Chitapur Taluk of the Kalaburagi District.
The remnants of a large stupa, as well as numerous brick buildings in the shape of a Chaitya-griha and memorial stupas, were uncovered during excavations conducted at Kanaganahalli from 1994 to 1998.
During the excavations, numerous architectural components of the stupa were discovered, including four pictures of the Buddha, remains of sculptured veneering slabs, pieces of railings, pillars, and The sculptured panels show different Játaka, the legend of Lord Buddha’s life and portraits of numerous Satavahana kings.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to forced labour (Vishti) in India during the Gupta period, which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) It was considered a source of income for the State, a sort of tax paid by the people.
- (b) It was totally absent in the Madhya Pradesh and Kathiawar regions of the Gupta Empire.
- (c) The forced labourer was entitled to weekly
- (d) The eldest son of the labourer was sent as the forced labourer.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Administrative aspect of Gupta Age
The correct answer is Option (a): During the Gupta period, forced labour (vishti) became a source of income for the state and was also looked upon as a form of taxation on the subjects. Vishti was forced labour in lieu of taxes hence no weekly wages were entitled. Anyone from the family can be sent as a forced labourer, not particularly the eldest son of the family.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following statements:

In the revenue administration of Delhi Sultanate, the in-charge of revenue collection was known as ‘Amil’.
The Iqta system of Sultans of Delhi was an ancient indigenous institution.
The office of ‘Mir Bakshi’ came into existence during the reign of Khalji Sultans of Delhi.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Medieval Terminology or keyword/ Medieval Administration
Statement 1 is correct: In the land revenue system of the Delhi Sultanate, the central government appointed amil to collect revenues in each subdivision called shiq.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The Iqta system of land control was first introduced in the Delhi Sultanate by Iltutmish. The institution known by its Arabic name, iqta, had existed in the early Islamic world as a means of rewarding services to the state. In the administration of the Caliphate, it served as a means of funding operations and compensating civil and military leaders. It was not an ancient indigenous institution.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The office of Mir Bakshi was established under the Mughal empire, who was head of the military department, nobility, information and intelligence agencies.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following statements:

Saint Nimbarka was a contemporary of Akbar.
Saint Kabir was greatly influenced by Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Bhakti and Sufi Movement
Statement 1 is incorrect: Saint Nimbarka is believed  to  be  the  contemporary  of
Ramanuja(11th  century).  He  believed  in
total devotion to Krishna and Rama. The Mughal emperor Akbar lived from 1542 -1605. Nimbarkacharya also known as Nimbarka, Nimbaditya or Niyamananda, was a Hindu philosopher, theologian and the chief proponent of the theology of Dvaitadvaita (dvaita–advaita) or dualistic–non-dualistic. He wrote Dashasloki and Vedanta. He was also a prominent astronomer
Statement 2 is incorrect: Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi (1564-1624 AD) was Islami Hanif, scholar of Naqsyabandi silsilah. Kabir (1440-1510 AD) was a follower of Nirguna bhakti of the 15th century.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to Mughal India, what is/are the difference/differences between Jagirdar and Zamindar?

Jagirdars were holders of land assignments in lieu of judicial and police duties, whereas Zamindars were holders of revenue rights without obligation to perform any duty other than revenue collection.
Land assignments to Jagirdars were hereditary and revenue rights or Zamindars were not hereditary.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Mughal Revenue System
Statement 1 is incorrect: Zamindars were also expected to maintain law and order in their jurisdictions. The judicial and police functions were performed locally by zamindars.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Jagirdar only has the right to claim and enjoy the revenue collected from the land. Jagirs were transferable and could be seized too.
Additional information:

The holder of land was termed Zamindar. They have hereditary rights over the land.
The primary responsibility of zamindars was to collect revenue and deposit it in the royal treasury.
Law and order were another duty imposed on zamindars in their jurisdictions. The local zamindars handled the police and judicial duties.
The Jagirdars were the King’s appointed officials who were given land by the King. The jagir system allocated a certain amount of land to each person, without any inheritance rights.
Jagirdar is only entitled to claim and enjoy the revenue collected from the land. Jagirs could be transferred and seized as well.**

---

### Question 7

With reference to Mian Tansen, which one of the following statements is not correct?

- (a) Tansen was the title given to him by Emperor Akbar.
- (b)Tansen composed Dhrupada on Hindu gods and goddesses.
- (c) Tansen composed songs for his patrons.
- (d) Tansen invented many ragas.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Art and Culture during the Mughals
Correct answer is Option (a): Tansen was the title given to him by Raja Vikramjit of
Gwalior.

Raja Ram Chandra of Bandavagarh employed Tansen as a court musician at his darbar (Rewa).
After learning of Tansen’s extraordinary talent, Akbar wrote the king of Rewa a “firman” requesting Tansen and appointed him as one of the Navaratnas in his court.
He bestowed upon him the name “Mian.” According to Lalita Ramakrishna’s Musical Heritage of India, Tansen is also referred to as the “Sangit Samrat”.
He composed various dhrupads on Rama, Parvati, Shiva, and Ganesha. A compilation of 300 of his dhrupad that were in Gauhar Bani is called Kalpadruma. Tansen composed his favorite ragas — Multani, Bhairavi and Todi.
He created the ragas Darbari Kanhra for the night, Mian Ki Todi for the morning, Mian ki Sarang for the midday, and Mian ki Malhar for the season.
His descendants and disciples are called Seniyas. He composed songs for his patrons.**

---

### Question 8

Who among the following Mughal Emperors shifted emphasis from illustrated manuscripts to albums and individual portraits?

- (a) Humayun
- (b) Akbar
- (c) Jahangir
- (d) Shah Jahan
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Art and Culture during the Mughals
Correct answer is Option (c): Mughal Emperor Jahangir shifted emphasis from illustrated manuscripts  to  albums  and  individual portraits.

The Mughal school of painting achieved increased charm, elegance, and grandeur during his rule.
The portrait of Jahangir, who is pictured holding a picture of the Virgin Mary in his right hand, is the best representation of this time period.
Ayar-i-Danish and Anwar-i-sunavli are two further animal fable books with illustrations that date to Jahangir’s reign.**

---

---

## Art Culture

### Question 1

Building ‘Kalyana Mandapam’ was a notable feature in the temple construction in the kingdom of

- (a) Chalukya
- (b) Chandela
- (c) Rashtrakuta
- (d) Vijayanagara
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Ancient Indian Temple Architecture
Option (d) is correct: A prominent aspect of the Vijayanagara kingdom’s temple construction was the construction of “Kalyana Mandapas.” Vijayanagara Architecture:

In 1336  AD,  Harihara  and  Bukka established the Vijayanagar Empire.
The chief  characteristics  of  the Vijayanagara architecture were:

The construction of tall gateways or Raya Gopurams,
The carved-pillared  Kalyana mandapam inside the temple grounds,
The Garbhagriha,


The Amman shrine.

The horse was the most prevalent animal on the pillars where sculptures were
A prominent aspect of this kingdom’s temple construction was the construction of “Kalyana Mandapas.”







Note: UPSC has asked a question from Themes in Indian History ll – An Imperial Capital Vijayanagara (pg.144). This underlines the importance of reading NCERTs between the lines with special emphasis on sidebars, charts, boxes and images.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements:

Deification of the Buddha
Trading the path of Bodhisattvas
Image worship and rituals

Which of the above is/are the features/features of Mahayana Buddhism?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Buddhism/Protest Religion
Option (d) is correct: All three statements are features of Mahayana Mahayana Buddhism  involves  the  deification  of  the Buddha, the path of the Bodhisattva, and the use of images and rituals in worship.
Mahayana Buddhism:

Mahayana sect of Buddhism emerged during the Fourth Buddhist council held at Kashmir during the reign of Kanishka.
Worship of images of Buddha and Bodhisattvas was a distinctive feature of this sect.
A Bodhisattvas is someone who has compassion within himself or herself and who is able to make another person smile or help someone suffer less. Every one of us is capable of this ~ Thich Nhat Hanh.
They accumulated knowledge through their hard work, delayed their passing to heaven, and helped others to attain Buddhahood.
Deification of the Buddha, Trading the path of Bodhisattvas and Image worship and rituals are all features of Mahayana Buddhism.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

In India, the use of carbofuran, methyl parathion, phorate and triazophos is viewed with These chemicals are used as

- (a) pesticides in agriculture
- (b) preservatives in processed foods
- (c) fruit-ripening agents
- (d) moisturizing agents in cosmetics
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Pesticides in Agriculture
Option (a) is the correct answer: Carbofuran, Methyl Parathion, Phorate and Triazophos are used as Pesticides.
Pesticides

In contrast to insecticides, which are used to specifically target and kill insects, pesticides are chemicals that can be used to kill fungus, bacteria, insects, plant diseases, etc.
Other categories of chemicals used:
Molluscicides control snails, slugs and similar molluscs.
By preventing fungal spores from penetrating plant tissue, fungicides manage hazardous fungi for plants.
Herbicides control
In India, pesticides must be registered with the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare’s affiliated Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage.**

---

### Question 2

In the context of which one of the following are the terms ‘pyrolysis and plasma gasification’ mentioned?

- (a) Extraction of rare earth elements
- (b) Natural gas extraction technologies
- (c) Hydrogen fuel-based automobiles
- (d) Waste-to-energy technologies
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Waste Management
Option (d) is the correct answer: Pyrolysis and Plasma Gasification are associated with Waste-to-energy technologies.

Pyrolysis is a process of chemical decomposition of organic matter brought about by heat.
In this process, the organic material is heated in the absence of air until the molecules thermally break down to become a gas comprising smaller molecules (known collectively as syngas).
Gasification can also take place as a result of partial combustion of organic matter in the presence of a restricted quantity of oxygen or air. The gas, so produced, is known as producer gas.
The gases produced by pyrolysis mainly comprise carbon monoxide (25%), hydrogen and hydrocarbons (15%), and carbon dioxide and nitrogen (60%).
It is used commercially as a waste to an energy system that converts municipal solid waste into synthesis gas (syngas) containing hydrogen and carbon monoxide that can be used to generate power.**

---

### Question 3

Why is there a great concern about the ‘microbeads’ that are released into the environment?

- (a) They are considered harmful to marine ecosystem.
- (b) They are considered to cause skin cancer in children.
- (c) They are small enough to be absorbed by crop plants in irrigated fields.
- (d) They are often found to be used as food adulterants.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Water Pollution
Option (a) is the correct answer: Microbeads (Harmful to Marine Ecosystem)

Microbeads are manufactured solid plastic particles of less than one millimetre in their largest dimension.
They are most frequently made of polyethene but can be of other petrochemical plastics such as polypropylene and polystyrene.
They are used in exfoliating personal care products, toothpaste and in biomedical and health-science research.
Microbeads can cause plastic particle water pollution and pose an environmental hazard for aquatic animals in freshwater and ocean
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has classified microbeads as “unsafe” for use in cosmetic products.
NGT had earlier directed the Centre to test cosmetic products containing microbeads after a plea sought a ban on their use on the ground they are extremely dangerous for aquatic life and the environment.**

---

### Question 4

Which of the following statements are correct about the deposits of ‘methane hydrate’?

Global warming might trigger the release of methane gas from these deposits.
Large deposits of ‘methane hydrate’ are found in Arctic Tundra and under the seafloor.
Methane in the atmosphere oxidised to carbon dioxide after a decade or two.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Methane Emission
Methane Hydrate:

A methane molecule is enclosed in a cage of interlocking water molecules to form the crystalline solid known as methane hydrate.
Methane is frozen into a form of water ice known as methane hydrate and is trapped in the sediments under the seafloor in large but relatively unknown quantities.
Methane hydrate is an “ice” that only naturally forms in underground deposits under ideal temperature and pressure circumstances.

Statement 1 is correct: Owing to the melting of ice, global warming might trigger the release of methane gas from these deposits hence having a significant impact in climate change.
Statement 2 is correct: Sediment and sedimentary rock units below Arctic permafrost have the temperature and pressure conditions suitable for the formation and stability of methane hydrate.
Statement 3 is correct: Methane is relatively short-lived in the atmosphere; a molecule of methane is oxidised to water and carbon dioxide within a decade or so, mainly by reaction with other trace gases.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following:

Carbon monoxide
Methane
Ozone
Sulphur dioxide

Which of the above are released into the atmosphere due to the burning of crop/biomass residue?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 1 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Air Pollution
Option (d) is the correct answer: All the given gases are result of Stubble Burning:

Burning stubble (parali) is the process of removing crop residue from the field in order to prepare it for the next crop.
Farmers in Haryana and Punjab must move quickly in order to plant the upcoming winter crop (Rabi crop), and if they are late due to short winters, they risk suffering significant losses. The cheapest and quickest method to remove the stubble is by burning it.

Effects of Stubble Burning:

Pollution: Open stubble burning releases a lot of harmful pollutants into the air, including smoke, particles, greenhouse gases (CO2, N2O, O3 CH4), air pollutants (CO, NH3, NOx, SO2, NMHC), and volatile organic compounds. These pollutants are dangerous to human health.
Soil Fertility: Husk burning reduces the fertility of the soil by destroying its
Heat Penetration: When stubble burns, heat is produced that permeates the soil, causing the loss of moisture and beneficial
Thus, all the above-mentioned gases are emitted due to the burning of crop/biomass**

---

### Question 6

In the context of which of the following do some scientists suggest the use of cirrus cloud thinning technique and the injection of sulphate aerosol into the stratosphere?

- (a) Creating the artificial rains in some regions
- (b) Reducing the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones
- (c) Reducing the adverse effects of solar wind on the Earth
- (d) Reducing the global warming
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Geoengineering
Option (d) is the correct answer: Geoengineering is used for Reducing global warming.

There is a renewed interest in two dominant methods of geoengineering such as stratospheric sulphate aerosol increase and cirrus cloud thinning aims to reduce global warming and precipitation rates to pre-industrial levels.
Geoengineering, often known as climate intervention, is the deliberate and extensive modification of the Earth’s climatic system with the intention of causing adverse global
The stratosphere can be injected with sulphate aerosol particles to block some of the sun’s rays and possibly cool the planet.
Sulphur droplets are good at scattering the sun’s light back out into space and it does not heat the stratosphere as much as other
Cirrus Clouds: The narrow bands of detached clouds or mostly white patches with frail white These could have a silky gloss or a fibrous (hair-like) appearance.
Cirrus clouds are always composed of ice crystals, and their transparency depends on how far the crystals are spaced apart.
Generally, these clouds barely affect the brightness of the sun when they pass over its They might block its light and erase its contour if they are particularly dense.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following statements:

Agricultural soils release nitrogen oxides into the environment.
Cattle release ammonia into the environment.
Poultry industry releases reactive nitrogen compounds into the environment.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Climate Change and Agriculture Option (d) is the correct answer: All statements about Climate Change and Agriculture are correct.

Total GHG Emissions: share of agriculture in total emissions has gradually declined from 28% in 1994 to 14% in 2016.
Emission Classification:

Agricultural emissions in India are primarily from the livestock sector (54.6%) and the use of nitrogenous fertilizers (19%).
Rice cultivation in anaerobic conditions accounts for a major portion of agricultural emissions (17.5%).
The single largest source of nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions is agricultural soils.


Air Pollution: As per the World Air Quality Report, 2020, 22 of the 30 most polluted cities in the world are in India and Delhi is the world’s most polluted capital. Delhi suffers severely from air pollution during the winter months due to stubble burning in adjoining states.
The Sixth Assessment Report by the IPCC has issued a “code red” to humanity declaring 1.5°C warming of the planet as inevitable.

Statement 1 is correct: Agricultural soils are the largest single source of nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions.
Statement 2 is correct: Cattle account for 80% of the ammonia production.
Statement 3 is correct: Poultry industry recorded an excretion of reactive nitrogen compounds of 0.415 tonnes in 2016.**

---

### Question 8

In the context of proposals to the use of hydrogen- enriched CNG (H-CNG) as fuel for buses in public transport, consider the following statements:

1. The main advantage of the use of H-CNG is the elimination of carbon monoxide emissions.

2. H-CNG as fuel reduces carbon dioxide and hydrocarbon emissions.

3. Hydrogen up to one-fifth by volume can be blended with CNG as fuel for buses.

4. H-CNG makes the fuel less expensive than CNG.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Mitigating Vehicular Emissions Option (b) is the correct answer: Advantages of use of hydrogen-enriched CNG (H-CNG) as fuel.
Hydrogen-enriched CNG (H-CNG)

A blended gas known as HCNG is produced by mixing hydrogen with CNG.
Since it burns cleaner than propane (C3H8) or LPG, it can be used in place of gasoline, diesel fuel, and those fuels.

Advantages

HCNG reduces emissions of CO up to 70%.
Enables up to 5 % savings in fuel.
First step towards the future Hydrogen economy.
Engines can be calibrated to release lower amounts of NO.
Engines can run on HCNG with minimal
Ideal fuel for heavy-duty vehicles and applications with high loads..
Better performance due to higher Octane rating of H2.

Statement 1 is incorrect: HCNG doesn’t eliminate but reduces emissions of CO up to 70%. Statement 2 is correct: It can be used in place of gasoline, diesel fuel and propane (C3H8) / LPG and its combustion produces fewer undesirable gases.
Statement 3 is correct: The blending of hydrogen with CNG provides a blended gas termed as HCNG. Statement 4 is incorrect: Current cost of Hydrogen is more than the cost of Natural Gas. So, HCNG’s cost is more than CNG.**

---

### Question 9

In India, ‘extended producer responsibility’ was introduced as an important feature in which of the following?

- (a) The Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998
- (b) The Recycled Plastic (Manufacturing and Usage) Rules, 1999
- (c) The e-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011
- (d) The Food Safety and Standard Regulations, 2011
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: E-Waste Management
Option (c) is the correct answer: Laws to manage e-waste have been in place in India since 2011 under The e-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011, which was amended in 2016 as E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016 recognises producers’ liability for recycling and reducing e-waste in the country.



Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR)
•   It is a policy approach under which producers are given a significant responsibility – financial and/or physical– for the treatment or disposal of post- consumer products.
•   The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has been given the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) authorisation under the new e-waste rules.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following statements:

1. As per law, the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority exists at both National and State levels.

2. People’s participation is mandatory in the compensatory afforestation programmes carried out under the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Environmental Policies and Initiatives
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act (Campa Act), 2016

Objective: To provide an appropriate institutional mechanism to utilize afforestation funds.
Sets up the Central and State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management & Planning Authorities (CAMPA).
It creates a State Compensatory Afforestation Fund under the Public Account of every state, as well as a National Compensatory Afforestation Fund under the Public Account of India.
National Fund receives 10% & State Fund gets 90% of funds 

Statement 1 is correct: As per the Act, the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) is set up at both central and state levels for expeditious and transparent utilisation of funds released for forest land diverted for non-forest purposes.
Statement 2 is incorrect: There is no such provision in the act, also the term “participation” does not occur in the said Act.**

---

### Question 11

Consider the following statements:

The Environment Protection Act, 1986 empowers the Government of India to:

1. State the requirement of public participation in the process of environmental protection, and the procedure and manner in which it is sought

2. Lay down the standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from various sources

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Major Environmental Laws
ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986

Objective: To     protect,      improve     the environment & reduce pollution.
Enacted aftermath of Bhopal Gas Tragedy (1984).
The Act, empowers the Government of India for:

Coordination of action by the state,
Planning and execution of nationwide programmes,
Authorises the central government to control & reduce pollution from all sources.
Laying down  environmental quality standards, especially those governing emission or discharge of environmental pollutants,
Placing restrictions on the location of industries and so on.
Authority to issue direct orders included orders to close, prohibit or regulate any industry.
Power of entry for examination, testing of equipment and other purposes and power to analyse the sample of air, water, soil or any other substance from any place.



Statement 1 is incorrect: Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 doesn’t contain any provision related to public participation.
Statement 2 is correct: Clearly, the Central Government lays down the standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from various sources**

---

### Question 12

As per the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 in India, which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) Waste generators have to segregate waste into five categories.
- (b) The Rules are applicable to notified urban local bodies, notified towns and all industrial townships only.
- (c) The Rules provide for exact and elaborate criteria for the identification of sites for landfills and waste processing facilities.
- (d) It is mandatory on the part of the waste generator that the waste generated in one district cannot be moved to another district.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Solid Waste Management
Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016

Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 promote the use of compost, conversion of waste into energy, and revision of parameters for landfills location and capacity.
It replaced the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000, are now applicable beyond municipal areas and have included urban agglomerations, census towns, notified industrial townships
Emphasis should be placed on waste segregation at the source, manufacturer responsibility for packaging and sanitary waste disposal, and user fees for collection, processing, and disposal from the bulk
It has also been advised that the bio- degradable waste should be processed, treated and disposed of through composting or bio-methanation within the premises as far as possible and the residual waste shall be given to the waste collectors or agency as directed by the local authority.**

---

### Question 13

Which one of the following National Parks lies completely in the temperate alpine:

- (a) Manas National Park
- (b) Namdapha National Park
- (c) Neora Valley National Park
- (d) Valley of Flowers National Park
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: National Parks/Biosphere Reserve
Option (d) is the correct answer: Valley of Flowers National Park was established in 1982.
Located in Chamoli, in the state of Uttarakhand, between 3352 and 3658 metres above sea level, it is renowned for its meadows of indigenous alpine flowers and the variety of vegetation. The park is entirely inside the temperate alpine region. It is located close to Joshimath in the Garhwal area, tucked in the upper reaches of the Bhyundar Ganga river’s Pushpawati river valley. The Asiatic black bear, snow leopard, musk deer, brown bear, red fox, and blue sheep are among the rare and endangered species that call this area home. Himalayan monal pheasants and other high-altitude birds can also be seen in the park.**

---

### Question 14

Which of the following are in Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve?

- (a) Neyyar, Peppara and Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuaries; and Kalakad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve
- (b) Mudumalai, Sathyamangalam and Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuaries; and Silent Valley National Park
- (c) Kaundinya, Gundla Brahmeswaram and Papikonda Wildlife Sanctuaries; and Mukurthi National Park
- (d) Kawal and Sri Venkateswara Wildlife Sanctuaries; and Nagarjunasagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve
Explanation


**Ans: a          
Sub-Theme: National Parks/Biosphere Reserve
Option (a) is the correct answer: Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve was established in 2001. It is located near the southernmost tip of the Western Ghats, straddling the boundary between the districts of Pathanamthitta, Kollam, and Thiruvananthapuram in Kerala and Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari in Tamil Nadu, South India. It includes the following wildlife sanctuaries: Kalakkad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve, Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary, Peppara Wildlife Sanctuary, and Neyyar Wildlife Sanctuary. It comprises the tropical wet evergreen forests of India, the moist deciduous forests of the South Western Ghats, the montane rain forests of the South Western Ghats, and Shola. The Kanikaran tribe, one of the oldest extant ancient tribes in the world, is also found in Agasthyamalai. In March 2016, it was added to the World Network of Biosphere Reserves of UNESCO.**

---

### Question 15

Consider the following statements:

1. Asiatic lions are naturally found in India only.

2. Double-humped camels are naturally found in India only.

3. One-horned rhinoceros is naturally found in India only.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a         
Sub-Theme: Species
Statement 1 is correct: Asiatic lions were once distributed to the state of West Bengal in the east and Rewa in Madhya Pradesh, in central India. At present Gir National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary is the only abode of the Asiatic lion. IUCN Red List: Endangered
Statement 2 is incorrect: Double-humped Camel or Bacterian Camel is native to the steppes of Central Asia, restricted to the Gobi and Gashun Gobi deserts of northwest China and Mongolia, and Ladakh in India.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Only the Great One- Horned Rhino is found in India, while the other four species spread across Africa, Java and Sumatra. IUCN Red List: Vulnerable. Indian Rhino Vision 2020 (IRV 2020) was launched in 2005 by the Forest Department, Government of Assam, in partnership with WWF India, the International Rhino Foundation, and several other organisations. It aimed to raise the rhino population in Assam to 3,000. Four Protected Areas in Assam have rhinos: Pabitora Wildlife Reserve, Rajiv Gandhi Orang National Park, Kaziranga National Park, and Manas National Park.**

---

### Question 16

Consider the following statements:

Some species of turtles are herbivores.
Some species of fish are herbivores.
Some species of marine mammals are herbivores.
Some species of snakes are viviparous.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: d         
Sub-Theme: Species Diversity
Statement 1 is correct: Unlike other members of its family, such as the hawksbill sea turtle, the green sea turtle is mostly herbivorous.
Statement 2 is correct: Surgeonfish and Parrotfish are algae eaters, other herbivores include the Japanese angelfish, yellow blotch- rabbitfish, and tilapia.
Statement 3 is correct: Manatees and dugongs are the only herbivores among marine mammals.
Statement 4 is correct: Boa constrictors and green anacondas are two examples of viviparous snakes, meaning they give birth to live young with no eggs involved at any stage of development.**

---

### Question 17

Consider the following pairs:

Wildlife Naturally              found in

Blue-finned Mahseer   : Cauvery River
Irrawaddy Dolphin       : Chambal River
Rusty-spotted Cat       : Eastern Ghats

Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c         
Sub-Theme: Species Habitat
Pair 1 is correctly matched: Blue Finned Mahseer is found in the Mula-Mutha River close to the Indian city of Pune, a part of the Krishna River basin. It is also found in other rivers of the Deccan Plateau and we know the deccan plateau has three principal rivers: the Godavari, the Krishna, and the Cauvery. It is a freshwater fish. It is also known as Deccan Mahseer or Tor Khudree. IUCN Status: Least Concern (LC).
Pair 2 is incorrectly matched: Irrawaddy Dolphin’s habitat extends from the Bay of Bengal to New Guinea and the Philippines. Also found in three rivers namely The Irrawaddy (Myanmar), the Mahakam (Indonesian Borneo) and the Mekong. The highest single lagoon population of dolphins is considered to be found in Chilika Lake. IUCN: Endangered.
Pair 3 is correctly matched: Rusty Spotted Cat was observed in eastern Gujarat’s Gir National Park, in Maharashtra’s Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and along India’s Eastern Ghats.**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

On 21st June, the Sun:

- (a) Does not set below the horizon at the Arctic Circle
- (b) Does not set below the horizon at Antarctic Circle
- (c) Shines vertically overhead at noon on the Equator
- (D) Shines vertically overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Motion of Earth
Option (a) is correct: Areas near the poles receive less heat as the rays of the sun are slanting.The North Pole is inclined towards the sun and the places beyond the Arctic Circle experience continuous daylight for about six months.
Summer Solstice (21st June):

The Northern Hemisphere is tilted towards the sun and the rays of the sun fall directly on the Tropic of Cancer hence the areas receive more heat.


Revolution of the Earth and Seasons

Since a large portion of the Northern Hemisphere is getting light from the sun, it is summer in the regions north of the equator. The longest day and the shortest night at these places occur on 21st June.
Southern Hemisphere: All these conditions are reversed (winter season- longer nights)**

---

### Question 2

Why are dewdrops not formed on a cloudy night?

- (a) Clouds absorb the radiation released from the Earth’s surface.
- (b) Clouds reflect back the Earth’s radition.
- (c) The Earth’s surface would have low temperatures on cloudy nights.
- (d) Clouds deflect the blowing wind to ground level
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Dew Formation/Water in Atmosphere
Option (b) is correct: The dew drops are not formed on a cloudy night because the Clouds reflect back the Earth’s radiation.

Cloud cover prevents radiation from earth surfaces from escaping during cloudy nights. It maintains a high air temperature. Additionally, the moisture won’t condense and turn into dew drops on the grass and leaves. Dew is formed when the air temperature touches the dew point.
Dew point is the temperature at which air becomes saturated with water vapor, causing condensation to form. It is the temperature at which the air would need to be cooled in order for the relative humidity to reach 100%.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the management of minor minerals in India, consider the following statements:

Sand is a ‘minor mineral’ according to the prevailing law in the country.
State Governments have the power to grant mining leases of minor minerals, but the powers regarding the formation of rules related to the grant of minor minerals lie with the Central government.
The State Government has the power to frame rules to prevent illegal mining of minor minerals.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a      
Sub-Theme: Minor Minerals in india
Statement 1 is correct: Sand is a ‘minor mineral’ according to the prevailing law in the country.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Any mineral which by the notification of the Central Government may declare to be a minor mineral.
Statement 3 is correct: The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals and for purposes connected there with.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to the cultivation of Kharif crops in which in the last five years, consider the following statements:

Area under rice cultivation is the highest.
Area under cultivation of jowar is more than that of oilseeds.
Area of cotton cultivation is more than that of
Area under sugarcane cultivation has steadily

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Major Crops
Statement 1 is correct: The area under rice cultivation in India, in 2013-14 was 44.13 million hectares while in 2015-16, it became 43.39 million hectares and is highest amongst all.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The annual area under Jowar ranges between 17 and 18 million hectares while the oilseed area is 28 million hectares (2013-14), 26.1 million hectares (2015-16) i.e area under the cultivation of Jowar is less than that of oilseeds.
Statement 3 is correct: The area under sugarcane cultivation is 4.99 million hectares (2013-14), 5.066 million hectares (2014-15), 4.953 million hectares (2015-16). The area under cotton cultivation is 11.96 million hectares (2013-14), 12.81 million hectares (2014-15), and 11.87 million hectares (2015-16). Hence the area under cotton cultivation is more than sugar cultivation.
Statement 4 is incorrect: The area under sugarcane cultivation has not steadily decreased.**

---

### Question 5

What is common to the places known as Aliyar, Isapur and Kangsabati?

- (a) Recently discovered uranium deposits
- (b) Tropical rain forests
- (c) Underground cave systems
- (d) Water reservoirs
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Current Affairs
Aliyar, Isapur and Kangsabati are the names which have water reservoirs common to the people.
About Water Reservoirs:

In Tamil Nadu’s Coimbatore district, the Aliyar reservoir is a body of water near Pollachi town.
In the Maharashtra district of Hingoli, there is an earth-fill dam called the Isapur Dam on the Penganga River.
As a part of the Indian Second Five-Year Plan, the Kangsabati Reservoir Project was launched in 1956 to provide water to the districts of Midnapur, Bankura, and It involves irrigation of land using water from the Kangsabati River, as well as the Shilabati and the Bhoirobbanki rivers.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following pairs:

Famous Place


River



1. Pandharpur
Chandrabhaga


2. Tiruchirappalli
Cauvery


3. Hampi
Malaprabha

Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Famous places of India
Pair 1 is correct: Pandharpur city is on the banks of Chandrabhaga River in Maharashtra. The famous Lord Vitthal-Rukmini Mandir is located in this city.
Pair 2 is correct: Tiruchirappalli is an Indian city of Tamil Nadu on the banks of river Cauvery. The famous Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple is located in Tiruchirappalli.
Pair 3 is incorrect: Hampi was the capital of the Vijayanagara kingdom and is located on the bank of the Tungabhadra River in present state of Karnataka. Many famous temples like Virupaksha Temple, Nandi Statue etc are located in Hampi. Pattadakal or Pattadakal is situated on the banks of the river Malaprabha and is located in Karnataka.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following pairs:

Sea


Bordering Country



1. Adriatic Sea
Albania


2. Black Sea
Croatia


3. Caspian Sea
Kazakhstan


4. Mediterranean Sea
Morocco


5. Red Sea
airyS

Which of the pairs given above are correctly matched?

- (a) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (b) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: World Map
Pair 1 is correct: The Adriatic Sea is a body of water separating the Italian Peninsula from the Balkan peninsula. The countries with coasts on the Adriatic sea: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Italy, Montenegro and Slovenia. Mnemonic: ISC-MBA (Italia, Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Bosnia, Albania).

Pair 2 is incorrect: Black Sea is a large inland sea situated at the southeastern extremity of Europe. It is bordered by Ukraine to the north, Russia to the northeast, Georgia to the east, Turkey to the south, and Bulgaria and Romania to the west. Black Sea is not bordered by Croatia. Mnemonic: Tea & BURGeR (Turkey, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Romania).

Pair 3 is correct: Caspian Sea is the world’s largest inland body of water, variously classed as the world’s largest lake or a full-fledged sea. It is an endorheic basin (a basin without outflows) located between Europe and Asia. It is bounded by Kazakhstan to the northeast, Russia to the northwest, Azerbaijan to the west, Iran to the south, and Turkmenistan to the southeast. Mnemonic: TARIK (Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Russia, Iran, Kazakhstan).

Pair 4 is correct: The Mediterranean Sea is an intercontinental sea that stretches from the Atlantic Ocean on the west to Asia on the east and separates Europe from Africa. The countries surrounding the Mediterranean in clockwise order: Spain, France, Monaco, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco.

Pair 5 is incorrect: Red Sea is a narrow strip of water extending south-eastward from Suez, Egypt, for about 1,930 km to the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait, which connects with the Gulf of Aden and thence with the Arabian Sea. The six countries bordering the Red Sea: Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Egypt, Sudan, Eritrea and Djibouti. The Red Sea is not bordered by Syria. Mnemonic: DESSEY (Djibouti, Eritrea, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Egypt, Yemen).**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

With reference to India’s Five -Year Plans, which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. From the Second Five -Year Plan, there was a determined thrust towards substitution of basic and capital good industries.

2. The Fourth Five -Year Plan adopted the objective of correcting the earlier trend of increased concentration of wealth and economic power.

3. In the Fifth Five -Year Plan, for the first time, the financial sector was included as an integral part of the Plan.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Economic Planning
Statement 1 is correct: From the Second Five Year Plan (1956-61), there was determined thrust towards substitution of basic and capital goods industries. This plan focused on Rapid Industrialization with an emphasis on capital goods and heavy industries. It was based on the PC Mahalanobis Model.
Statement 2 is correct: The Fourth Plan (1969-74) provided a necessary corrective to the earlier trend which helped particularly the stronger sections in agriculture as well as in industry to enable them rapidly to enlarge and diversify the production base. It has adopted the objective of correcting the earlier trend of increased concentration of wealth and economic power. Thus, it targeted Growth with Stability and progressive achievement of self- reliance.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Fifth plan (1974-78) aimed at removal of poverty and attaining self-reliance. The financial sector became an integral part of the plan in the Ninth five -year plan (1997-2002).**

---

### Question 2

The economic cost of food grains to the Food Corporation of India is Minimum Support Price and bonus (if any) paid to the farmers plus:

- (a) Transportation cost
- (b) Interest cost only
- (c) Procurement incidentals and distribution
- (d) Procurement incidentals and charges for godowns.
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Government Policies/Food Security
Food Corporation of India (FCI):

Food Corporation of India (FCI) is a Public Sector Undertaking that falls under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs’ Department of Food and Public Distribution.
In 1965, the Food Corporations Act of 1964 created the FCI, a statutory body. It was founded in the midst of a severe grain crisis, particularly in wheat.
In order to suggest remunerative pricing to farmers, the Commission on Agricultural

Costs and Prices (CACP) was established in 1965.

The Economic Cost of food grains to the FCI is the Minimum Support Price and bonus (if any) paid to the farmers plus the procurement incidentals and distribution
Procurement incidentals are expenses incurred during procurement till the food grains reach the first point of godown.
Distribution costs are now included in economic costs, whilst buffer carrying costs are now included in buffer subsidies.**

---

### Question 3

Among the agricultural commodities imported by India, which one of the following accounts for the highest imports in terms of value in the last five years?

- (a) Spices
- (b) Fresh fruits
- (c) Pulses
- (d) Vegetable oils
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Agricultural commodity Trading
Import of Agricultural commodities:

Vegetable oils account for the highest import in terms of value in the last five years. India relies on imports for 70% of its edible oil consumption.
Pulses account for second-most highest while fresh fruits account for third highest and spices account for least imports in terms of value in the last five years among the above-mentioned agricultural commodities imported in India.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to land reforms in independent India, which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) The ceiling laws were aimed at family holdings and not individual holdings.
- (b) The major aim of land reforms was providing agricultural land to all the landless.
- (c) It resulted in cultivation of cash crops as a predominant form of cultivation.
- (d) Land reforms permitted no exemptions to the ceiling limits.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Land Reforms
Land Reforms in Independent India:

The Land Reforms in India aimed at the redistribution of ownership holdings and reorganizing operational holdings from the view point of optimum utilization of land.
It was a major aim of land reforms to provide agricultural land to all the landless.
The Objectives of the Land Reforms are as follows:

Removing institutional discrepancies of the agrarian structure.
Providing agricultural land to all the landless.
Issues of socio-economic inequality.
In order to address the interconnected issues of poverty, hunger, and food insecurity, agricultural productivity must be increased.



Additional Information:

Land Ceiling laws were applied to family holdings as well as individual holdings depending upon the region/state.
The outcome of Land reforms: (i) abolition of intermediaries, (ii) fixation of ceilings on land holdings, and (iii) redistribution of surplus land among landless or semi-landless peasants. Cultivation of cash crops requires much more other inputs rather than the mere availability of holdings. Commercialization of agriculture, and not land reforms, led to an increase in the cultivation of cash crops.
Certain exemptions to the ceiling limits were allowed for plantations of crops like tea and coffee.**

---

### Question 5

Among the following, which one is the largest exporter of rice in the world in the last five years?

- (a) China
- (b) India
- (c) Myanmar
- (d) Vietnam
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Agricultural commodity Trading
In recent years (2014-18), Vietnam’s rice exports were between 13 and 16 percent, Thailand’s between 22 and 25 percent, and India’s between 25 and 26 percent. Since the beginning of this decade, India has been the leading exporter of rice worldwide (2011-12).**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following statements:

1. Coal sector was nationalised by the Government of India under Indira Gandhi.

2. Now, coal blocks are allocated on lottery basis.

3. Till recently, India imported coal to meet the shortages of domestic supply, but now India is self-sufficient in coal products.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Coal Sector
Statement 1 is correct: The nationalisation was done in two phases, the first with the coking coal mines in 1971-72 and then with the non -coking coal mines in 1973. Indira Gandhi served as the Prime Minister of the country from 1971-1973.
Statement 2 is incorrect: After the Supreme Court cancelled the coal block allocations in 2014. To manage and reallocate the cancelled blocks in a transparent and accountable manner, the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015 enabled the provisions for ‘allocation of coal mines by way of auction and allotment for the sale of coal’.
Statement 3 is incorrect: India has the 5th largest coal reserves in the world, but due to the monopolies of some firms, it cannot produce enough coal to meet the shortages. It imports coal to meet the shortages. Domestic coal has been able to meet only 75% of our annual coal demand. About 200 mt of imports are used to make up for the shortage of local coal supply.




NOTE: Even if we don’t know the exact answer, we can still attempt the questions through elimination method. For example, observing the third statement, ‘self sufficient in coal products’ sounds absurd. Now if we have covered daily newspapers and NCERTs (geography) then we know that India holds the 5th biggest coal reserves in the world but due to incapacity of coal production by monopolistic firms, it imports coal to meet the shortages of domestic supply.
Hence, statement 3 is wrong and by eliminating this single statement we can arrive at the correct answer.**

---

### Question 7

The Service Area Approach was implemented under the purview of

- (a) Integrated Rural Development Programme
- (b) Lead Bank Scheme
- (c) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
- (d) National Skill Development Mission
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Government Policies/Financial Inclusion
Option (b) is correct: Service Area Approach is a developed version of the “area approach” method of the Lead Bank Scheme.
Service Area Approach (SAA):

It is a developed version of the “area approach” method of the Lead Bank
Under SAA, each commercial bank branch in the rural and semi-urban area was designated to serve 15 to 25 villages for the planned and orderly development of the areas and the concerned branch was responsible for meeting the needs of bank credit of its service area.
The service area approach was introduced in 1989 as part of the Lead Bank Scheme.
The main goals of SAA were to boost lending that was productive and create solid connections between bank credit, production, productivity, and rising income**

---

### Question 8

The Chairman of public sector banks are selected by the:

- (a) Banks Board Bureau
- (b) Reserve Bank of India
- (c) Union Ministry of Finance
- (d) Management of concerned bank
Explanation


**Ans: (a)
Sub-Theme: PSU Bank/Banking Appointment
Option (a) is correct: Banks Board Bureau recommends for selection of heads – Public Sector Banks and Financial Institutions and helps banks in developing strategies and capital raising plans.
Bank Board Bureau

It was established as an independent organisation in February 2016 based on the suggestions of the RBI appointed Nayak
It was part of the Indradhanush
It suggested for the selection of full-time directors and non-executive chairs for Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and state-owned financial institutions.
In cooperation with the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Finance makes the final decision regarding the appointments.

Composition:

Banks Board Bureau comprises the Chairman, three ex-officio members i.e., Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises, Secretary of the Department of Financial Services and Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, and five expert members, two of which are from the private sector.**

---

### Question 9

Which of the following is not included in the assets of a commercial bank in India?

- (a) Advances
- (b) Deposits
- (c) Investments
- (d) Money at call and short notice
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Banking mechanism
Bank Assets:

A bank places its funds in assets to earn
The assets include investments, money at call and short notice, loans and advances and bills discounted and purchased.
Additionally, it covers the cash in hand with the banks and also the cash held with the RBI.
The liabilities include deposits (both time and demand) and borrowings.**

---

### Question 10

Which of the following is issued by registered foreign portfolio investors to overseas investors who want to be part of the Indian stock market without registering themselves directly?

- (a) Certificate of Deposits
- (b) Commercial Paper
- (c) Promissory Note
- (d) Participatory Note
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Foreign Investment
P-Notes or Participatory Notes

These are overseas derivative instruments with underlying assets that are Indian

They permit unregistered overseas investors to purchase equities listed on Indian exchanges.**

---

### Question 11

Which one of the following is not the most likely measure the Government/ RBI takes to stop the slide of the Indian rupee?

- (a) Curbing imports of nonessential goods-and promoting exports
- (b) Encouraging Indian borrowers to issue rupee denominated Masala Bonds
- (c) Easing conditions relating to external commercial borrowing
- (d) Following an expansionary monetary policy
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: RBI monetary policy
Option (a) is incorrect: This would help control imports and thus the depreciation of the rupee.
Option (b) is incorrect: Masala bonds were brought in to curb the slide of rupee since the borrowing is rupee-dominated and does not put pressure on our currency through borrowing dollars.
Option (c) is incorrect: Easing ECBs will lead to higher borrowing abroad and would temporarily bridge the deficit of forex in India preventing the slide of rupee.
Option (d) is correct: An expansionary monetary policy may lead to lower interest rates and thus flight of foreign capital from India (which would get better returns abroad). Also, such a policy may fuel inflation and higher imports through higher government spending and further cause a slide of the rupee.**

---

### Question 12

The money multiplier in an economy increases with which one of the following?

- (a) Increase in the Cash Reserve Ratio in the banks
- (b) Increase in the Statutory Liquidity Ratio in the banks
- (c) Increase in the banking habit of the people
- (d) Increase in the population of the country
Explanation


**Ans: (c)
Sub-Theme: Money Multiplier/Money Supply

The money multiplier is the amount of money created by banks for a given fixed amount of base money and reserve ratio. For example, if the commercial banks gain deposits of Rs1 Lakh and this leads to a final money supply of Rs 10 lakh. The money multiplier is 10.
An increase in the banking habit of the population will increase the lending, thereby will lead to more deposits in the banks hence increasing the money**

---

### Question 13

In the context of India, which of the following factors is/are contributor/contributors to reducing the risk of a currency crisis?

The foreign currency earnings of India’s IT sector
Increasing the government expenditure
Remittances from Indians abroad

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b         
Sub-Theme: Currency crisis/BoP
Currency crisis is brought about by a decline in the value of a country’s currency which negatively affects an economy. It creates instabilities in exchange rates, meaning that one unit of a certain currency no longer buys as much as it used to in another currency.
Statements 1 and 3 are correct: The foreign current earnings of India’s IT sector and remittances from abroad would lead to more inflow of foreign currencies in the economy and boost the foreign exchange reserves.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Increasing government expenditure will have no effect on the value of the currency since it is not related to change in foreign exchange reserves or any currency fluctuations.**

---

### Question 14

Consider the following statements:

1. Most of India’s external debt is owed by governmental entities.

2. All of India’s external debt is denominated in US dollars.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d          
Sub-Theme: External Debt
Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Government report on External debt, December 2018-Commercial borrowings are the largest component of external debt with a share of 37.1%, followed by NRI deposits (23.9%) and short-term trade credit (19.9%).
Statement 2 is incorrect: US dollar- denominated debt continued to be the largest component of India’s external debt with a share of 45.9 % at the end of December 2018, followed by the Indian Rupee (24.8 %), SDR (5.1 %), Yen (4.9 %) and Euro (3.1 %).**

---

### Question 15

Consider the following statements:

1. Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) exchange rates are calculated by comparing the prices of the same basket of goods and services in different

2. In terms of PPP dollars, India is the sixth largest economy in the world.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a         
Sub-Theme: Purchasing Power
Statement 1 is correct: PPP is an economic theory that compares different countries’ currencies through a “basket of goods” approach. The PPP between two countries measures the amount of one country’s currency required to purchase a basket of goods and services in the country that is compared to the amount of another country’s currency in order to purchase a similar basket of goods and services. e.g. -If a dumpling is selling in India for Rs100 and in China for ¥2, this would imply a PPP exchange rate of 1¥ to Rs 50.
Statement 2 is incorrect: In terms of PPP dollars. China is the world’s largest economy, followed by the US and India at third position (2018) respectively.**

---

### Question 16

In a given year in India, official poverty lines are higher in some States than in others because:

- (a) Poverty rates vary from State to State
- (b) Price levels vary from State to State
- (c) Gross State Product varies from State to State
- (d) Quality of public distribution varies from State to State
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Poverty

Poverty Lines: Poverty is pronounced deprivation in well-being and comprises many dimensions. It includes low incomes and the inability to acquire the basic goods and services necessary for survival with dignity – World Bank.
Poverty lines would vary from State to State because of inter-state price 
According to the Planning Commission, the national poverty line for rural regions in 2011–12 was estimated to be Rs. 816 per capita per month in rural areas and Rs. 1,000 per capita per month in urban areas using the Tendulkar methodology.
The population’s income distribution and the basis for consumer spending determine the poverty line.
The poverty line is a function of the cost of the consumption basket which varies from state to state.**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

In the context of any country, which one of the following would be considered as part of its social capital?

- (a) The proportion of literates in the population
- (b) The stock of its buildings, other infrastructure and machines
- (c) The size of population in the working age group
- (d) The level of mutual trust and harmony in the society
Explanation


**Ans: d
Option (d) is correct: The term social capital was popularised by Robert As per OECD, it can be defined as “networks together with shared norms, values and understandings that facilitate co-operation within or among groups”. It consists of trust, mutual understanding, shared values and behaviour that bind together the members of a community and make cooperative action possible. Such interaction enables people to build communities, to commit themselves to each other, and to knit the social fabric.
Option (a) is incorrect: The proportion of literates in the population and the size of population in the working age group are the examples of human capital.
Option (b) is incorrect: The stock of its buildings, other infrastructure and machines is the example of physical capital.**

---

### Question 2

Under which Schedule of the Constitution of India can the transfer of tribal land to private parties for mining be declared null and void?

- (a) Third Schedule
- (b) Fifth Schedule
- (c) Ninth Schedule
- (d) Twelfth Schedule
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Articles and Schedules of Indian Constitution
Fifth Schedule:

Deals with the provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Article 244 (1) of the Constitution defines Scheduled Areas as the areas defined so by the President of India and are mentioned in the 5th schedule of the Constitution.
In the Samatha v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors (1997) judgment the Supreme Court held that the transfer of tribal land to private parties for mining was null and void under the Fifth Schedule.
Under the fifth Schedule, the Governors can make regulations for peace & good government of Scheduled Areas after consulting the Tribal Advisory Council (TAC).
Such regulations may prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members of the scheduled tribes, regulate the allotment of land to members of the scheduled tribes and regulate the business of moneylending in relation to the scheduled tribes.

Additional Information:
Third Schedule: The third schedule of Indian Constitution is related with the Forms of Oaths or Affirmations for – The Union and the State ministers, The candidates for election to the Parliament and State Legislature, Members of the Parliament and State Legislature, The judges of the SC and HC, CAG.
Ninth Schedule: Provisions as to validation of certain Acts and Regulations of the state legislatures dealing with land reforms and abolition of the zamindari system and of the Parliament dealing with other matters. Twelfth Schedule: This schedule was added by the 74th Amendment Act of 1992 and it specifies the powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities.**

---

### Question 3

The Ninth Schedule was introduced in the Constitution of India during the prime minister ship of:

- (a) Jawaharlal Nehru
- (b) Lal Bahadur Shastri
- (c) Indira Gandhi
- (d) Morarji Desai
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Articles and Schedules of Indian Constitution
Ninth Schedule:

The Ninth Schedule of the Indian Constitution was added by  the  1st  Amendment(1951) to protect the laws included in it from judicial scrutiny on the ground of violation of fundamental rights. At this time, Jawaharlal Nehru was the Prime Minister of India. He remained in the office from the year 1947 to 1964.


This schedule deals with the provisions as to validation of certain Acts and Regulations of the state legislatures dealing with land reforms and abolition of the zamindari system and of the Parliament dealing with other matters.

Additional Information:
Prime Ministership of the following leaders are as follows:

Lal Bahadur Shastri: 1964 – 1966
Indira Gandhi: 1966 – 1971 and 1980 – 1984
Morarji Desai: 1977 – 1979




NOTE: Question on Ninth Schedule came in 2018.**

---

### Question 4

In the context of polity, which one of the following would you accept as the most appropriate definition of liberty?

- (a) Protection against the tyranny of political rulers
- (b) Absence of restraint
- (c) Opportunity to do whatever one likes
- (d) Opportunity to develop oneself fully
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Key Words in the Preamble
“Opportunity to develop oneself fully” covers liberty fully, therefore, one may surmise that the purpose of ensuring ‘liberty’ is that one has no obstacles or hindrances to realise one’s full potential.
Additional Information:

“Protection against the tyranny of political rulers” is a partial definition and has a connotation more towards fundamental rights rather than liberty.
“Absence of restraint” only covers part of the definition of liberty.
Liberty does not mean ‘licence’ to do whatever one likes; it is to be enjoyed within the limitations mentioned in the Constitution itself.**

---

### Question 5

Which Article of the Constitution of India safeguards one’s right to marry the person of one’s choice?

- (a) Article 19
- (b) Article 21
- (c) Article 25
- (d) Article 29
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Right to Privacy
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution deals with the protection of Life and Personal Liberty. This very article safeguards one’s right to marry the person of one’s choice. In the famous Hadiya Case (2017), the Supreme Court held that, “The right to marry a person of one’s choice is integral to Article 21 (right to life and liberty) of the Constitution”.
Additional Information:

Article 19: This article is related to the protection of six rights regarding freedom of:

Speech and expression
Assembly
Association
Movement
Residence
Profession


Article 25: This article deals with the freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.
Article 29: This article is related to the protection of language, script and culture of minorities.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following statements:

1. The 44th Amendment to the Constitution of India introduced an article placing the election of the Prime Minister beyond judicial review.

2. The Supreme Court of India struck down the 99th Amendment to the Constitution of India as being violative of the independence of judiciary.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Important and Major Constitutional Amendments
Statement 1 is incorrect: The 44th amendment  of  the  Indian  Constitution was significant as it removed partially the distortions that were introduced into the Constitution by 42nd Amendment, but it had no proposal of an article placing the election of the Prime Minister beyond judicial review. The 39th Amendment of the Constitution of India, enacted on 10 August 1975, placed the election of the President, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha beyond the scrutiny of the Indian courts. It was passed during the Emergency of 1975–1977.
Statement 2 is correct: The 99th Constitutional Amendment Act would have established the National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC). But, in 2015, a five judge Constitution Bench of SC by 4:1 majority upheld the collegium system and struck down the NJAC as unconstitutional.
In this regard, Justice Khehar stated that the proposed NJAC violated the judiciary’s independence because the expectation from the judiciary is to protect the rights of the citizens of this country, and that this expectation can only be ensured by maintaining absolute isolation and independence from the other organs of government.**

---

### Question 7

With reference to the Constitution of India, consider the following statements:

1. No High Court shall have the jurisdiction to declare any central law to be constitutionally invalid.

2. An amendment to the Constitution of India cannot be called into question by the Supreme Court of India.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Final Interpreter and Guardian of the Constitution
Statement 1 is incorrect: Though the 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 curtailed the power of HC in judicial review and debarred the HC from considering the constitutional validity of any central law.
However, the 43rd Amendment Act of 1978 restored the original position of the HC and moreover now the HC is considered as the principal civil courts of original jurisdiction in each state and union territory, thus they shall have the jurisdiction to declare any central law to be constitutionally invalid.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The Constitution of India has conferred a very extensive jurisdiction and vast powers on the Supreme Court. As the SC is the final interpreter and guardian of the Constitution and also the guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens.
Moreover, in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973), SC laid down a new doctrine of the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. Therefore, any constitutional amendment that is ultra vires or goes against the ‘basic structure’ of the Indian Constitution can be nullified by the SC.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following statements:

1. The Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act , 1959 exempts several posts from disqualification on the grounds of ‘Office of Profit’.

2. The above-mentioned Act was amended five times.

3. The term ‘Office of Profit’ is well-defined in the Constitution of India.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Qualification and Disqualification of Parliament
Statement 1 is correct: There is no bar on how many offices can be exempted from the purview of the law. In the past the Supreme Court also held that the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Amendment Act, 2006 exempting 55 offices occupied by members of Parliament from disqualification was constitutionally valid.
Statement 2 is correct: Parliament has also enacted the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959, which has been amended five times to expand the exempted list.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Though the expression ‘office of profit’ is mentioned in the Articles 102(1)(a) and 191(1)(a) of Constitution, however, it has neither been ‘defined’ in the Indian Constitution nor in the Representation of the People Act, 1951. According to Articles 102(1)(a) and 191(1)(a) of Constitution, legislators (MP or MLA) can be barred from holding office of profit under Central Government or state government as it can put them in position to gain financial benefit.**

---

### Question 9

In India, which of the following review the independent regulators in sectors like telecommunications, insurance, electricity, ?

1. Ad Hoc Committee set up by the Parliament.

2. Parliamentary Department Related Standing Committee

3. Finance Commission

4. Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission

5. NITI Aayog

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 1, 3 and 4
- (c) 3, 4 and 5
- (d) 2 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: a   
Sub-Theme: Parliamentary Committees

Parliamentary Committee: The purpose of the parliamentary committees is to study and address a wide range of issues that the legislature cannot directly address owing to their magnitude. They also keep an eye on how the executive branch is operating. There are two types of parliamentary committees: permanent or standing committees and ad hoc committees.
Department Related Standing Committee: They are elected or appointed periodically, and they work on a continuous basis to secure more accountability of the Executive to the Parliament, particularly financial accountability. The latter are created on an ad hoc basis as the need arises and they are dissolved after they complete the task assigned to them.
Ad hoc committees: These committees are created on an ad hoc basis as the need arises and they are dissolved after they complete the task assigned to them.
Both the  Parliamentary  committees are responsible to review the independent regulators in sectors like telecommunications, insurance, electricity, etc.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following statements:

1. The motion to impeach a Judge of the Supreme Court of Indian cannot be rejected by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha as per the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.

2. The Constitution of India defines and gives details of what constitutes ‘incapacity and proved misbehaviour’ of the Judges of the Supreme Court of India.

3. The details of the process of impeachment of the Judges of the Supreme Court of India are given in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.

4. If the motion for the impeachment of a Judge is taken up for voting, the law requires the motion to be backed by each House of the Parliament and supported by a majority of total membership of that House and by not less than two-thirds of total members of that House present and voting.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Removal of Judges

Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, a removal motion signed by 100 members (Lok Sabha) or 50 members (Rajya Sabha) is to be given to the Speaker/ Chairman. The speaker has the discretion to accept or reject the motion.
Statement is 2 incorrect: The Constitution of India does not define and gives details of the expression ‘incapacity and proved misbehaviour’ of the Judges of the Supreme Court of India which are the ground for the impeachment of the Judges.
Statement 3 is correct: The details of the process of impeachment of the Judges of the Supreme Court of India is governed by the Judges Enquiry Act (1968).
Statement 4 is correct: If the motion for the impeachment of a Judge is taken up for voting, the law requires that the motion be passed by a ‘special majority’ i.e. majority of the total membership of the House and majority of not less than two thirds members present and voting.**

---

### Question 11

With reference to the Constitution of India, prohibition or limitations or provisions contained in ordinary laws cannot act as prohibitions or limitations on the constitutional powers under Article 142. It could mean which one of the following.

- (a) The decisions taken by the Election Commission of India while discharging its duties cannot be challenged in any court of law.
- (b) The Supreme Court of India is not constrained in the exercise of its powers by laws made by the Parliament.
- (c) In the event of a grave financial crisis in the country, the President of India can declare a Financial Emergency without the counsel from the Cabinet.
- (d) State Legislatures cannot make laws on certain matters without the concurrence of the Union Legislature.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Jurisdiction and Powers of Supreme Court
Article 142 of the Indian Constitution deals with the Enforcement of decrees and orders of the Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc. The SC in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it. This is often termed as ‘judicial activism’. Also in the Union Carbide Case, 1989, the Supreme Court while overriding the laws made by the Parliament invoked Article 142 to provide relief awarding the compensation to victims affected in the Bhopal Gas Tragedy.
Additional Information:

The ECI has the power to administer the election to Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, State Legislative Assemblies in India, and the offices of the President and Vice President in the country. The decision of the election commissions can be challenged by the petitions in the High Court and Supreme 
Article 360 empowers the president to proclaim a financial emergency if he is satisfied that a situation has arisen due to which the financial stability or credit of India or any part of its territory is threatened but the proclamation should be approved by the Parliament through a simple majority within two months.
According to Article 196 the state legislature can make laws on State List as well as on Concurrent List.**

---

### Question 12

With reference to the Legislative Assembly of a State in India, consider the following statements:

1. The Governor makes a customary address to Members of the House at the commencement of the first session of the year.

2. When a State Legislature does not have a rule on a particular matter, it follows the Lok Sabha rule on that matter.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a      
 Sub-Theme: Legislative Powers of Governor
Statement 1 is correct: Article 176(1) states that, through the legislative powers of the Governor, he can address the state legislature at the commencement of the first session after each general election and the first session of each year.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The State legislature is a constitutional body and derives its power from the Constitution itself and as per Article
208 (1) of the Constitution, a house of the Legislature of a State may make rules for regulating subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its business. This implies that the state legislature does not follow Lok Sabha rules, no
such provision exists.**

---

### Question 13

Which one of the following suggested that the Governor should be an eminent person from outside the State and should be a detached figure without intense political links or should not have taken part in politics in the recent past?

- (a) First Administrative Reforms Commission (1966)
- (b) Rajamannar Committee (1969)
- (c) Sarkaria Commission (1983)
- (d) National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (2000)
Explanation


**Ans: c        
Sub-Theme: Centre’s Control Over State Legislation

1st ARC Recommendation (1966): The first ARC recommended the appointment of persons having long experience in public life and administration and non-partisan attitude as governors.
Rajamannar Committee (1969): The Rajamannar Committee recommended the provision that the state ministry holds office during the pleasure of the governor should be omitted.
Sarkaria Commission (1983): The “Sarkaria Commission” recommended that the Governor should be a distinguished outsider without intense political links, that he should not have recently participated in politics, and that he should not be a member of the ruling party.
National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (2000): The committee recommended that the president should appoint the governor of a state only after consultation with the chief minister of that state.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

Which one of the following groups of plants was domesticated in the ‘New World’ and introduced into the ‘Old World’?

- (a) Tobacco, cocoa and rubber
- (b) Tobacco, cotton and rubber
- (c) Cotton, coffee and sugarcane
- (d) Rubber, coffee and wheat
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Columbian Exchange
Tobacco, cocoa, and rubber are the groups of plants that were domesticated in the ‘New World’ and introduced into the ‘Old World’ through the European explorers in the late medieval or early modern era.
The Columbian Exchange:

The Columbian exchange, also known as the Columbian interchange, named for Christopher Columbus, was the widespread transfer of plants, animals, culture, human populations, technology, diseases, and ideas between the Americas, West Africa, and the Old World in the 15th and 16th centuries.
It also relates to European colonization and trade following Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage. Invasive species, including communicable diseases, were a by-product of the Exchange.
Old World to New World: Coffee, wheat, cotton, barley, rice, sugarcane and sugar beet, etc.
New World to Old World: avocado, cashew, cocoa bean, potato, maize, rubber, tobacco, etc.

NOTE: Even if we don’t know the exact answer of this particular question, we can still attempt this question with our basic knowledge. For instance, Cotton and wheat has been a widely cultivated crop in India since ancient times. Even Harappans grew**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements about ‘the Charter Act of 1813’:

It ended the trade monopoly of the East India Company in India except for trade in tea and trade with China.
It asserted the sovereignty of the British Crown over the Indian territories held by the company.
The revenues of India were now controlled by the British Parliament.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Administrative Reforms before 1857
CHARTER ACT OF 1813:

Company’s territories in India came under the Sovereignty of the British Government.
Taxes could be levied against citizens by the local They could punish people for not paying taxes.
It ended the East India Company’s monopoly on trading with India.
The company’s rule was extended for another 20 years. The trade monopoly of their country was ended except for the trade in tea, opium, and with China.
Giving missionaries permission to travel to India was one of the key components of this law.

PITT’S INDIA ACT OF 1784:

Pitt’s India Act, 1784 extended the control of the British Government over the Company’s affairs and its administration in India.

The act was significant for two reasons:

The Company’s possessions in India were officially referred to as “British possessions in India” for the first time.
The Company’s activities and administration in India were placed under the total control of the British Government.
Statement 1 is correct: The Charter Act 1813 ended the trade monopoly of the East India Company except for the trade in tea, opium, and with China.
Statement 2 is correct: Company’s territories in India came under the Sovereignty of the British Government through this Act.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The revenue of India was controlled by the British parliament through Pitt’s India Act 1784.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to Swadeshi Movement consider the following statements:

It contributed to the revival of the indigenous artisan crafts and industries.
The National Council of Education was established as a part of the Swadeshi Movement.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Swadeshi Movement
Swadeshi and Boycott Movements:

There were large-scale protests against the partition of Bengal. Later, the movement spread to other regions of the nation:
The Boycott Resolution was passed at the Calcutta Town Hall on August 7, 1905, formally launching the Swadeshi Movement.
Partition came into force: October 16, 1905
There were also new means of protest like processions, public meetings, and boycotts of imported goods.
Imaginative use of Traditional Festivals, Melas: Tilak’s Ganapati and Shivaji festivals became a medium of swadeshi
Statement 1 is correct: Importance to Self- Reliance (Atma Shakti): Emphasis was placed on honour, social and economic regeneration of the villages. Swadeshi enterprises: Swadeshi textile mills, banks, etc, were set up. At Tuticorin, V.O. Chidambaram Pillai founded the Swadeshi Steam Navigation Company.
Statement 2 is correct: Swadeshi programme or National Education:


Bengal National College – Aurobindo Ghosh as its Principal – inspired by Tagore’s
The National Council of Education (1906) was set up to organise national education in the vernacular medium.
The Bengal Institute of Technology was established to provide technical training.

Cultural Impact: Rabindranath Tagore wrote Amar Sonar Bangla, Subramania Bharati wrote Swadesha Geetham.
Corps of Volunteers or ‘Samitis’: they generated political consciousness among the masses.







NOTE: Question on similar theme/topic i.e Surat Split/Partition of Bengal/Swadeshi Movement came in 2014 (on annulment of partition of Bengal), 2015 and 2016 (total 2 questions). Hereby, revising PYQ stands important.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to the British colonial rule in India, consider the following statements:

Mahatma Gandhi was instrumental in the abolition of the system of ‘indentured labour’.
In Lord Chelmsford’s War Conference’, Mahatma Gandhi did not support the resolution on recruiting Indians for World War.
Consequent upon the breaking of the Salt Law by the Indian people, the Indian National Congress was declared illegal by the colonial rulers.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b        
Statement 1 is correct: During the early 1900s, Mahatma Gandhi was instrumental in getting the indentured labour system abolished in the British Empire. He also supported Manilal Doctor’s campaign to get a resolution passed in the INC meeting condemning the indentured labour system in all British territories.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Lord Chelmsford, the then Viceroy of India, invited Gandhi to Delhi at a War Conference. In order to gain the trust of the empire, Gandhi agreed to move people to enlist in the army for WW-I.
Statement 3 is correct: Indian National Congress was declared illegal upon breaking of salt law. But this did not deter the satyagrahis who continued the movement.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to Indian National Movement, consider the following pairs:

Person
Position held


1. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru
President, All India Liberal Federation


2. K. C. Neogy
Member, The Constituent Assembly


3. P. C. Joshi
General Secretary, Communist Party of India

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d        
Sub-Theme: Important Personalities/ Important Organisations
Pair 1 is correct: All India Liberal Federation was founded by Surendra Nath Banarjea and some of its prominent leaders were Tej Bahadur Sapru, V. S. Srinivasa Sastri and R. Jayakar and Tej Bahadur Sapru were the presidents of Indian National Liberal Federation.
Pair 2 is correct: K.C. Neogy was a member of the Constituent Assembly of India, a member of the first Cabinet of independent India and the chairman of the first Finance Commission of India.
Pair 3 is correct: P.C. Joshi was one of the early leaders of the communist movement in India, he was the first general secretary of the Communist Party of India from 1935–47.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following pairs:

Movement
Organization Leader


1. All India Anti- Untouchability League
Mahatma Gandhi


2. All India Kisan Sabha
Swami Sahajanand Saraswati


3. Self-Respect Movement
E. V. Ramaswami Naicker

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d 
Sub-Theme: Important Organisations
Pair 1 is correct: On 30 September 1932, Mahatma Gandhi founded the All India Anti Untouchability League, to remove untouchability in society.
Pair 2 is correct: Sahajanand Saraswati was the first President of the All-India Kisan Sabha.
Pair 3 is correct: The Self-Respect Movement was started by E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker in Tamil Nadu in 1925 with the aim of destroying the contemporary Hindu social order in its totality and creating a new, rational society without caste, religion and god.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

With reference to the recent developments in science, which one of the following statements is not correct?

- (a) Functional chromosomes can be created by joining segments of DNA taken from cells of different species.
- (b) Pieces of artificial functional DNA can be created in laboratories.
- (c) A piece of DNA taken out from an animal cell can be made to replicate outside a living cell in a
- (d) Cells taken out from plants and animals can be made to undergo cell division in laboratory petri dishes
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Genetics/DNA

Statement 1 is incorrect: The combining of DNA fragments acquired from cells of different species cannot result in the creation of functional chromosomes.
Statement 2 is correct: In a lab, artificial functioning DNA fragments can be produced. Japanese researchers announced the creation of the first DNA molecule in the world that is almost entirely formed of synthetic components in 2007.
Statement 3 is correct: In a lab, it is possible to get a portion of animal DNA to reproduce on its own outside of a living cell. It is done through the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) technology.
Statement 4 is correct: In a lab setting, Petri dishes can be used to induce cell division in isolated plant and animal cells. Plant cells are totipotent and a single cell has the capacity to divide through the process of mitosis in sterile conditions in a culture Petri dish to develop into a mature plant.**

---

### Question 2

‘RNA interference (RNAi)’ technology has gained popularity in the last few Why?

It is used in developing gene silencing therapies.
It can be used in developing therapies for the treatment of cancer.
It can be used to develop hormone replacement therapies.
It can be used to produce crop plants that are resistant to viral pathogens.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 4
- (b) 2 and 3
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 1 and 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Genetics/Biotechnology
RNA interference (RNAi) or Post- Transcriptional Gene Silencing (PTGS) is a conserved biological response to double- stranded RNA that mediates resistance to both endogenous parasitic and exogenous pathogenic nucleic acids, and regulates the expression of protein-coding genes.

Statement 1 is correct: Its natural mechanism for sequence-specific gene silencing promises to revolutionize experimental biology and may have important practical applications in functional  genomics, therapeutic intervention, agriculture and other areas. 
Statement 2 is correct: Numerous studies have demonstrated that RNAi can provide a more specific approach to inhibit tumor growth by targeting cancer-related genes (i.e., oncogene).
Statement 3 is incorrect: RNA interference (RNAi) cannot be used to develop hormone replacement therapies.
Statement 4 is correct: The reverse experiment “virus-induced gene silencing” in which short sequences of plant genes were introduced into viruses, showed that the targeted gene was suppressed in an infected plant. It will produce crop plants that are resistant to viral pathogens.**

---

### Question 3

Which of the following are the reasons for the occurrence of multi-drug resistance in microbial pathogens in India?

Genetic predisposition of some people
Taking incorrect doses of antibiotics to cure diseases
Using antibiotics in livestock farming
Multiple chronic diseases in some people

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d) 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Multi-drug resistance

Rising incomes, decreased prescription costs, and uncontrolled sales have resulted in an increase in antibiotic use and higher rates of resistance, evaluations of the burden of resistance have received little attention in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs)
Statement 1 is incorrect: genetic predisposition is a genetic trait that, in response to environmental factors, may influence the potential phenotypic development of an individual organism within a species or community.

Antibiotic resistance is unrelated to the genetic tendency of a small minority of persons in a society.


Statement 2 is correct: The rise of bacterial strains that are resistant to several antibiotics could be caused by the improper usage of antibiotic FDCs.
Statement 3 is correct: Using the antibiotics in livestock farming increases, the antibiotic multidrug resistance transfers in microbial pathogens
Statement  4  is  incorrect:  Additionally,MDR exacerbates the risk of resistant microorganisms spreading, which reduces treatment effectiveness and, ultimately, prolongs the duration of an infection in patients. But, multiple chronic diseases in people is not the reason of MDR.**

---

### Question 4

What is Cas9 protein that is often mentioned in the news?

- (a) A molecular scissors used in targeted gene editing
- (b) A biosensor used in the accurate detection of pathogens in patients
- (c) A gene that makes plants pest-resistant
- (d) A herbicidal substance synthesized in genetically modified crops
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Gene editing
Option (a) is correct: The Cas9 enzyme functions as a molecular scissor that can cut DNA, and the single-guide RNA (sgRNA) contains a sequence that can bind to DNA. Together, these two components make up the gene editing tool
About CRISPR Cas9:

Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats” or CRISPR Cas9 is the abbreviation.
With the use of CRISPR genome editing technology, researchers may quickly and precisely alter any genome’s DNA.
As a sort of adaptive immunity, bacteria use the CRISPR-Cas9 system to identify and eliminate viral DNA. Researchers may add, delete, or modify specific DNA sequences from the genomes of higher species using the CRISPR system’s components.
The Cas9 enzyme functions as a molecular scissor that can cut DNA, and the single- guide RNA (sgRNA) contains a sequence that can bind to DNA. Together, these two components make up the gene editing**

---

### Question 5

Which one of the following statements is not correct?

- (a) Hepatitis B virus is transmitted much like HIV.
- (b) Hepatitis B, unlike Hepatitis C, does not have a vaccine.
- (c) Globally, the number of people infected with Hepatitis B and C viruses are several times more than those infected with HIV.
- (d) Some of those infected with Hepatitis B and C viruses do not show the symptoms for many years.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Vaccines and drugs
Option (b) is correct: There is currently no cure for Hepatitis C. The mainstay of hepatitis B prevention is the hepatitis B vaccine.

A viral infection known as hepatitis B affects the liver and can result in both acute and chronic illness. Contact with the blood or other bodily fluids of an infected individual can spread the virus.
HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C can all be spread through unprotected sexual contact, contaminated syringes, infected blood, and
Hepatitis B and C afflict a far greater number of people than HIV infection does.
There is currently no cure for Hepatitis C. The mainstay of hepatitis B prevention is the hepatitis B vaccine.
The most prevalent serious liver infection in the world and a hazard to public health globally is hepatitis B. It can spread up to 100 times faster than the HIV/AIDS virus.
Hepatitis B and C infections can cause chronic liver disease, liver cirrhosis, and hepatocellular cancer in people who are symptom-free for years or who only experience minor symptoms.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to communications technologies, what is/are the difference/differences between LTE (Long- Term Evolution) and VoLTE (Voice over Long-Term Evolution)?

LTE is commonly marketed as 3G and VoLTE is commonly marketed as advanced 3G.
LTE is data-only technology and VoLTE is voice- only technology.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Communication Technology

The LTE protocol used by mobile phone networks has undergone a technological update called Voice over LTE (VoLTE). Voice calls are routed to the telecom companies’ older 2G or 3G networks under LTE, which solely supports data transmission.
Because of this, using LTE prevents you from using your 4G data services while on a call. This causes issues like sluggish internet speeds and muddled voice quality.
The most popular version of Long Term Evolution (LTE) is 4G LTE.

VoLTE enables the packaging and transmission of voice calls over LTE networks. This indicates that 4G data is usable even while on a call.
VoLTE is an Internet Protocol Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) specification that allows for smooth network operation of a number of services, such as voice and video, without the need to switch between different


This would provide access to 4G data even when on a call.
Statement 1 is incorrect: Long term Evolution (LTE) is commonly marketed as 4G LTE.
Statement 2 is incorrect: VoLTE is an Internet Protocol Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) specification which enables a variety of services to operate seamlessly on the network rather than having to switch to different applications for voice or video.




NOTE: UPSC simply loves to ask questions on new age technologies which are frequent in news. You need not know every single intricacies but UPSC expects the aspirants to know ‘something’ of ‘everything’ under the sun. Therefore, it is advisable to read the daily newspaper and understand the basic concepts of those technologies, through additional research, for eg: 5G, AI, Blockchain, Additive Manufacturing, 3D Printing, Deep fakes, Brain interface, Augmented Reality, Metaverse, etc.**

---

### Question 7

In the context of digital technologies for entertainment, consider the following statements:

In Augmented Reality (AR), a simulated environment is created and the physical world is completely shut out.
In Virtual Reality (VR), images generated from a computer are projected onto real -life objects or
AR allows individuals to be present in the world and improves the experience using the camera of smart – phones or PCs.
VR closes the world, and transposes an individual, providing a complete immersion experience.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 3 and 4
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Digital Technologies
The main difference between the two is that VR(Virtual Reality) builds the world in which we immerse ourselves through a specific headset. It is fully immersive and everything we see is part of an environment artificially constructed through images, sounds, etc. On the other hand, in augmented reality (AR), our own world becomes the framework within which objects, images or similar are placed.

Statement 1 is incorrect: Users view and interact with the physical environment while digital content is added to in augmented reality (AR). A good example of augmented reality is Pokemon Go.
Statement 2 is incorrect: In Virtual Reality (VR), images generated from a computer are not projected onto real -life objects or surroundings rather, with help of virtual reality headset, helmet, or other equipment a virtual reality (VR) environment gives the user the impression that they are completely engrossed in their surroundings.
Statement 3 is correct: Users may easily test out AR with the camera of a smartphone by downloading an app. However, there is another way to experience augmented reality. With specialised AR headsets, like Google Glass, digital content is displayed on a small screen in front of the user’s eyes.
Statement 4 is correct: With images and things that seem real, a virtual reality (VR) environment gives the user the impression that they are completely engrossed in their surroundings. A virtual reality headset, helmet, or other equipment is used to view this environment.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following statements:

A digital signature is __________

an electronic record that identifies the certifying authority issuing it
used to serve as a proof of identity of an individual to access information or serve on Internet
an electronic method of signing an electronic document and ensuring that the original content is unchanged

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Digital technology

A digital signature is a type of electronic signature that can be used to verify the identity of the person sending a message or signing a document and to guarantee that the message’s or document’s original content hasn’t changed.
Digital signatures are portable and impossible for anyone to forge. The sender cannot just deny the message later if it can be verified that the Original Signed message actually arrived.
Certificates serve as evidence of a person’s identity for specific purposes; for instance, a driver’s licence identifies someone who is legally permitted to drive in a specific
Similarly, you can use a digital certificate to sign specific papers electronically or to authenticate your identity while accessing information or services online.
However, compared to digital signature certificates, digital signatures are distinct (DSC). DSC is the electronic version of paper certificates like a passport or driver’s licence. A digital signature certificate is a computer-based record that identifies the certifying authority providing it, while a digital signature is an electronic technique of conveying an electronic document.

Statement 1 is incorrect: The digital signature is an electronic method of sending an electronic document whereas a digital signature certificate is a Computer Based record that identifies the certifying authority issuing it.
Statement 2 is incorrect: A digital certificate is not used to prove your identity, to access information or services on the Internet or to sign certain documents digitally.
Statement 3 is correct: A digital signature is an electronic form of signature that can be used to authenticate the Identity of the sender of a message or a signer of a document and also ensure that original content of the message on document that has been sent is unchanged.**

---

### Question 9

In the context of wearable technology, which of the following tasks is/are accomplished by wearable devices?

Location identification of a person
Sleep monitoring of a person
Assisting the hearing impaired person

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Digital Technology

Electronic technologies or devices that may be comfortably worn on the body are known as wearables. Real-time information tracking is done with these wearable
They have motion sensors that capture an image of your daily activity and sync it with laptops or mobile devices. Wearable electronics are the next major technological advance after the introduction of smartphones.
Most wearable devices, including activity trackers, smartwatches, and even medical wearables that monitor patients’ physical activity and health, include location and position-tracking sensors, such as GPS, altimeters, magnetometers, compasses, and accelerometers.
Fitness trackers, often referred to as activity trackers, are typically worn on the wrist, chest, or ears and are intended to track outdoor sporting activities as well as assess fitness-related parameters including running speed and distance, breath, heart rate, and sleeping patterns.
Hearables, or wearable technology worn on the ear, have recently experienced a fresh wave of popularity. The type of hearables known as Hearing-Aids uses a microphone, speaker, and This enhances noises to improve hearing for those who have hearing loss. as in the Phonak Audeo V

Statement 1 and 2 are correct: Wearables are electronic technology or devices incorporated into items that can be comfortably worn on a body. These wearable devices are used for tracking information such as location, sleep data, fitness track, etc. on a real-time basis.
Statement 3 is correct: The type of hearables known as Hearing-Aids enhances noises to improve hearing for those who have hearing loss.**

---

### Question 10

For the measurement/ estimation of which of the following are satellite images/remote sensing data used?

Chlorophyll content in the vegetation of a specific location.
Greenhouse gas emissions from rice paddies of a specific location.
Land surface temperatures of a specific

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Remote sensing technology/Space technology
For assessing chlorophyll content from remote sensing data utilising a multispectral imaging system, the Normalized Area Vegetation Index (NAVI) has been developed. Using satellite photography and the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, the world’s food supply is being tracked (NDVI).

In agriculture, near-infrared radiation is utilised to identify healthy vegetation. Green light is reflected by healthy vegetation, while red and blue light are absorbed. Our eyes perceive green light because plants produce chlorophyll during photosynthesis.
Remote sensing technology provides more accurate paddy field data. Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer is used to estimate GHGs emissions like CH4 emissions from rice paddies.
The most widely used instruments are radiometers and photometers, which can collect radiation that is emitted and reflected at a variety of frequencies. Additionally, they can be used to identify the emission spectra of different substances, providing information on atmospheric chemical
One of the most important factors in land- surface physical processes at the regional and global levels is land surface temperature (LST), which has been extensively used in hydrology, meteorology, and the surface energy balance. A distinctive method for determining the LST at both regional and global scales is remote sensing.
Statement 1 is correct: Chlorophyll will reflect more light in the green and near infrared spectrum compared to other wavelengths. This is why near infrared radiation in combination with NDVI is one of the primary remote sensing applications in agriculture and the environment. Statement 2 is correct: Remote sensing technology is capable of providing more accurate paddy field data. Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer is used to estimate Greenhouse gas emissions like CH4 emissions from rice paddies.
Statement 3 is correct: Remote sensing is a unique way of obtaining the Land Surface Temperature (LST) at regional and global scales.**

---

### Question 11

Recently, scientists observed the merger of giant ‘blackholes’ billions of light years away from the Earth. What is the significance of this observation?

- (a) ‘Higgs boson particles’ were detected.
- (b) ‘Gravitational waves’ were detected.
- (c) Possibility of intergalactic space travel through ‘wormhole’ was confirmed.
- (d) It enabled the scientists to understand ‘singularity’.
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Space science/Gravitational waves
The Correct answer is Option (b):

The LIGO detectors detected the first gravitational waves produced by two giant merging blackholes in 2016.
In 2017, the Nobel Prize for physics was awarded to the LIGO-VIRGO collaboration for their detection of gravitational waves arising from the merging of two black






Gravitational waves are ripples in spacetime’s fabric brought on by cosmic catastrophes like neutron star or black hole collisions. These disturbances are incredibly powerful, yet their signals are feeble and difficult to detect when they travel through distant regions of space and time.
In other words, it took that long for the signals to reach Earth. As a result, the observatory provides a chance to go back in time and solve puzzles about the origins of the universe.
The LIGO-VIRGO collaboration has found these signals four times since then. Black holes, neutron stars, and other similar objects may be mapped using gravitational wave astronomy, which is currently a science of the near future. Astronomy provides a technique of mapping the visible objects in the universe.
A wormhole is a hypothetical structure that connects dispersed places in spacetime. It is based on a unique solution to the Einstein field equations. It is also known as an Einstein-Rosen bridge or wormhole. Although wormholes are consistent with the general theory of relativity, it is yet unknown whether they truly exist.
The Higgs field, one of the fields in particle physics theory, undergoes quantum excitation to form the Higgs boson, an elementary particle in the Standard Model of particle physics. The Higgs particle is a large scalar boson with no electric charge, colour charge, or spin in the Standard Model.
The technological singularity, often known as the singularity, is a hypothetical time period in which unpredictably drastic changes to human civilisation result through uncontrollable and irreversible technology advancement. John von Neumann was the first to use the term “singularity” in a technological context.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following statements:

According to the Indian Patents Act, a biological process to create a seed can be patented in
In India, there is no Intellectual Property Appellate
Plant varieties are not eligible to be patented in

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Patent

Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Patents Act, 1970 – “plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro organisms but including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or propagation of plants and animals” are inventions not patentable.
Statement 2 is incorrect: In India, the Intellectual  Property  Appellate  Board, a quasi -judicial body, was constituted in September 1958. The Board is given the task of adjudication of disputes related to copyright registration, assignment of copyright, grant of Licences in respect of works withheld from public, unpublished Indian works, production and publication of translations and works for certain specific purposes. It also hears cases in other miscellaneous cases instituted before it under the Copyright Act, 1957.
Statement 3 is correct: There are no laws in India that allow for patenting of plants. The Delhi High Court invalidated Monsanto’s patent on Bt cotton seeds in April 2018. In its ruling, the two-judge panel presided by Justice S. Ravindra Bhat stated that some things, including seeds, animals, and plants, cannot be patented in India. However, the Supreme Court recently permitted agricultural juggernaut Monsanto to claim patent on its genetically modified (GM) cotton seeds by overturning a Delhi High Court decision on January 8, 2019.**

---

---

