# UPSC Prelims 2021 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

Consider the following pairs:

Historical place
Well – known for


1. Burzahom
Rock-cut shrines


2. Chandra – ketugarh
Terracotta art


3. Ganeshwar
Copper artefacts

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Significant features of historical places

Pair 1 is incorrect: Burzahom had a well- developed bone tool industry. Other finds at Burzahom include pits and coarse Rock-cut shrines were not a feature of the Burzahom site.
Pair 2 is correct: Chandraketugarh is located in the Ganges delta in West Bengal. It was famous for terracotta art. It is connected to Ganga by the Vidyadhari river which makes it ideal for a flourishing trade centre.
Pair 3 is correct: Ganeshwar is located in the northeastern part of Rajasthan. Hundreds of copper artefacts have been found at this site which suggests it must have been a copper working centre.**

---

### Question 2

Which one of the following ancient towns is well- known for its elaborate system of water harvesting and management by building a series of dams and channelizing water into connected reservoirs?

- (a) Dholavira
- (b) Kalibangan
- (c) Rakhigarhi
- (d) Ropar
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Location of historical place and its significant/unique feature

Option (a) is correct: Dholavira was discovered in 1968 by archaeologist Jagat Pati Joshi, one of the most remarkable and well-preserved urban settlements in South Asia. After Mohen- jo-Daro, Ganweriwala and Harappa in Pakistan and Rakhigarhi in Haryana of India, Dholavira is the fifth largest metropolis of Indus Valley Civilization (IVC). The City of Dholavira had an impressive and unique system of water harvesting and management systems. The Rann’s water levels may have been greater in protohistoric times than they are now, enabling boats to travel from the shore all the way up to the site. Manhar and Mandsar, two streams, border the Dholavira site. To direct their water into reservoirs, dams had to be constructed.
Option (b) is incorrect: Kalibangan is located
on the bank of the Ghaggar river in Rajasthan. A fire altar, Camel’s bones and Wooden plough have been found here.
Option (c) is incorrect: Rakhigarhi is the largest Harappan site in the Indian subcontinent. Planned townships having mud-brick as well as burnt-brick were found here.
Option (d) is incorrect: At the Ropar site, a building made of stone and oil, a dog buried with humans and an oval pit burial have been found**

---

### Question 3

From the decline of Guptas until the rise of Harshavardhana in the early seventh century, which of the following kingdoms were holding power in Northern India?

The Guptas of Magadha
The Paramaras of Malwa
The Pushyabhutis of Thanesar
The Maukharis of Kanauj
The Yadavas of Devagiri
The Maitrakas of Valabhi

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 2 and 5
- (b) 1, 3, 4 and 6
- (c) 2, 3 and 4
- (d) 5 and 6
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Historical Timeline of post-Gupta
The correct answer is Option (b): Due to Hun invasions, the Gupta kingdom was weakened in its power and several independent kingdoms arose in north India such as Yashodharman of Malwa, the Maukharis of Kanauj, the Maitrakas in Saurashtra and others. During that time the Gupta empire was restricted to Magadha only. Pushyabhuti of Thanesar (Haryana) also carved an independent state around that time. During the 10th CE, Tomars of Delhi, Chauhans of Rajasthan, Solankis of Gujarat, Parmars of Malwa, Chandels of Bundelkhand started ruling north India. During the 14th CE, the Yadavas of Devagiri (Maharashtra) became an important ruling dynasty of Deccan. By eliminating options 2 and 5, we can get the correct answer.




NOTE: If we try to apply knowledge of Physical geography here, we can try to attempt this otherwise difficult and complex question. Question is talking about “Northern India”. We all know Malwa (Malwa plateau) is located in central India (option 2) and Devagiri in Deccan (Devgiri Fort) (option 5). If we take calculable risk of elimination of both of these statements, we can reach the correct answer.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to the history of ancient India, Bhavabhuti, Hastimalla and Kshemeshvara were famous:

- (a) Jain monks
- (b) Playwrights
- (c) Temple architects
- (d) Philosophers
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Ancient Indian Literature
The Correct answer is Option (b):

Bhavabhuti was the court poet of King Yashovarman of Kannauj in 8th CE. His written plays include Mahavircharitra, Uttamcharitra, Malatimadhava. Bhavabhuti was an 8th-century scholar of India noted for his plays and poetry, written in Sanskrit. His plays are considered the equal of the works of Kalidasa. Bhavabhuti was born in Padmapura, Vidarbha, in Gondia district, on the Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh border. He is described as an ‘Udumbara Brahmin’. Dayananidhi Paramahansa is known to be his guru. He composed his historical plays at ‘Kalpi’, a place on banks of river Yamuna.


Hastimalla was a Kannada poet and playwright during Hoysalas reign.
Kshemeshvara was an 11th-century Sanskrit poet from Kashmir in He is known for his poetic works and for his contributions to the development of Sanskrit poetry. One of the important works attributed to him is the Dasavatar Charita.
Playwrights write scripts for plays to be enacted on a stage.





NOTE: It is always advisable to read about various personalities during historic times and their contribution to the various fields – Art, literature, religion, paintings, playwrights, philosophy songs among others. UPSC asked questions on similar themes in 2020 and 2012.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following statements:

It was during the reign of Iltutmish that Chengiz Khan reached the Indus in pursuit of the fugitive Khwarezm prince.
It was during the reign of Muhammad bin Tughluq that Taimur occupied Multan and crossed the Indus.
It was during the reign of Deva Raya II of the Vijayanagara Empire that Vasco da Gama reached the coast of Kerala.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Foreign invaders/Foreign Travellers Statement 1 is correct. In his pursuit of the fugitive Khwarezm prince, Changez Khan arrived in India during the reign of Iltutmish. By denying shelter to Prince Jalaluddhin of Central Asia, Iltutmish protected India from Changez Khan’s fury.
Statement 2 is incorrect. The period of Muhammad bin Tughlaq was from 1325 to 1351. Taimur invaded India during the reign of Nasurud-din Muhammad Shah(1394-1412), the last Tughlaq ruler.
Statement 3 is incorrect. The reign of Devaraya II lasted from 1422 to 1426. He died in 1446. Vasco da Gama came to India in 1498.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to Indian history, which of the following statements is/are correct?

The Nizamat of Arcot emerged from Hyderabad.
The Mysore Kingdom emerged from the Vijayanagara Empire.
Rohilkhand Kingdom was formed out of the territories occupied by Ahmad Shah Durrani.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: political history of medieval India
Statement 1 is incorrect: The kingdom of Arcot, also known as the kingdom of Carnatic,was the monarchy that ruled over the majority of the eastern part of the present-day Tamil Nadu region throughout the eighteenth century.
Statement 2 is correct: Under the Vijayanagar Empire, there was a small feudal kingdom called Mysore. The ruling Wodeyar dynasty declared their independence following the fall of Vijayanagar in 1565, and Raja Wodeyar ascended the throne in 1578. The capital moved from Mysore to Srirangapatna in 1610.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Ali Muhammad Khan established  Rohilakhand,  a  small kingdom, by taking advantage of the breakdown of authority in North India following Nadir Shah’s invasion.**

---

### Question 7

According to Portuguese writer Nuniz, the women in Vijayanagara Empire were experts in which of the following areas?

Wrestling
Astrology
Accounting
Soothsaying

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Foreign Traveller/Vijaynagar Empire
Correct answer is Option (d): According to Fernao Nuniz: “he (the king of Vijaynagar) also has women who wrestle, do accounting and others who are astrologers and soothsayers.

Fernao Nuniz was a Portuguese traveler who visited the Vijayanagar empire during the reign of Achyuta Deva Raya. He has recorded that in Vijayanagara society, women typically held prominent positions, and there are numerous examples of them actively participating in the political, social, and literary life of the kingdom.
In addition to receiving training in wrestling, using swords and shields, music, and other fine arts, some of these women also had some exposure to literature.**

---

### Question 8

With reference to medieval India, which one of the following is the correct sequence in ascending order in terms of size?

- (a) Paragana—Sarkar—Suba
- (b) Sarkar—Paragana—Suba
- (c) Suba—Sarkar—Paragana
- (d) Paragana—Suba—Sarkar
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Mughal Administration
Correct answer is Option (a):

The correct order according to the size is:

Pargana >Sarkar> Suba.

The entire Suba was split into Sarkars (districts), with a military commander known as the chief Shiqdar in charge of each one. Each Sarkar was divided into smaller units called Parganas.
Each Pargana had two Karkuns (clerks or writers), one Fotahdar (treasurer), one Shiqdar (military officer), one Amin or Munsif (civilian judge).
In order to organise his kingdom for better administration and taxation, Akbar adopted Sher Shah’s methods and principles.**

---

---

## Art Culture

### Question 1

Which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) Ajanta Caves lie in the gorge of the Waghora river.
- (b) Sanchi Stupa lies in the gorge of the Chambal river.
- (c) Pandu-Lena Cave Shrines lie in the gorge of the Narmada river.
- (d) Amaravati Stupa lies in the gorge of the Godavari river.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Ancient Architecture/Sculpture/ Ajanta Cave
Option (a) is correct: The famous Buddhist site of Ajanta lies in the Sahyadri hills by the gorge of the Waghora river.
Option (b) is incorrect: Sanchi lies to the west of the Betwa river. Madhya Pradesh’s Sanchi Stupa built by Ashoka in the 3rd century BCE has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Option (c) is incorrect: Pandu-Lena cave shrines also known as Nasik Caves are located at Gomai river, about 6 kilometres north of Shahada, Maharashtra.
Option (d) is incorrect: Amaravati stupa lies in the gorge of the Krishna river. It is the largest one in the state of Andhra Pradesh, with a diameter of about 50 metres and a height of about 27 metres.**

---

### Question 2

With reference to Chausath Yogini Temple situated near Morena, consider the following statements:

It is a circular temple built during the reign of the Kachchhapaghata Dynasty.
It is the only circular temple built in India.
It was meant to promote the Vaishnava cult in the region.
Its design has given rise to a popular belief that it was the inspiration behind the Indian Parliament building.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 4
- (d) 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Ancient Indian Temple Architecture

Statement 1 is correct: The Chausath Yogini temple is in Morena district in Madhya Pradesh. According to an inscription dated 1323 CE, this temple was built by Kachachapaghata king Devapala (1055-1075).
Statement 2 is incorrect: The temple with a circular design pattern is situated on top of a small hill. It is not the only circular temple in India.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Originally 64 yoginis were placed in 64 subsidiary shrines around the central shrine of Maha Shakti. Today Shiva linga have taken their place in shrines. The central shrine also holds a Shivalinga. Statement 4 is correct: This temple’s circular design has given rise to the popular idea that the Indian parliament’s design was taken from here.




NOTE: If we observe the statement carefully, it claims that it is the “only circular temple built in India” which seems extreme and absolute. If it is so, it should come across in Fine art NCERT. If we take risk of eliminating statement 2, we can get the correct answer. It should be noted that extreme statements are always not wrong. In many instances, UPSC gave an extreme and exclusive statement as the correct one. So choose options logically and wisely.
Under the central vista project, a new parliament building is constructed. The existing parliament building is a replica of Chausath Yogini Temple. Thus it is also important to cover the daily newspaper thoroughly.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to India, the terms ‘Halbi, Ho and Kui’ pertain to:

- (a) Dance forms of Northwest India
- (b) Musical instruments
- (c) Prehistoric cave paintings
- (d) Tribal languages
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Tribal Culture
Option (d) is correct: Halbi, Ho, and Kui are the tribal languages. Halbi is an Eastern Indo-Aryan language, Kui is a South-Eastern Dravidian language spoken by the Kandhas and Ho language is spoken by tribal communities of Odisha, Jharkhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, and Assam.

Halbi, Ho and Kui are languages spoken by tribes of India.


Halbi is spoken in the states of Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. It belongs to the group of Indo Aryan tribal languages.
Ho and Kui are important Dravidian languages along with Kolami, Konda, Koya, Gondi, Kudukh, Parji.




NOTE: Now, even if you don’t know the exact answer you can still reach the correct answer if you have read about ‘Ho and Munda Uprisings’ in Modern Indian History. Therefore, it is advisable to read each and every subject with clear understanding and also try to interlink the subject with the other subject.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

In nature, which of the following is/are most likely to be found surviving on a surface without soil?

Fern
Lichen
Moss
Mushroom

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 4 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3
- (d) 1, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Biodiversity/Ecosystem
Option (c) is the correct answer: Lichen and Moss can survive on a surface without soil.
Bryophytes:

The plant body is differentiated into a small stem and simple leaves, but true roots are
They usually grow in moist E.g. Liverworts, mosses
Mosses constitute the major component of Indian bryoflora followed by liverworts and hornworts
Mosses are non-vascular plants. They do not need soil to survive, instead they have a rhizoid multi-cell anchoring structure that is used to climb and grip over rocky surfaces.
Moss thrives in moist and shady

Statement 1 is incorrect: There are four particular types of habitats that ferns are found in: moist, shady forests; crevices in rock faces, especially when sheltered from the full sun; acid wetlands including bogs and swamps; and tropical trees, where many species are epiphytes.
Statement 2 is correct: Lichens are generally found on rock, tree bark, soil, houses, tombstones, cars, old farm equipment, etc. Thus, lichen can be found surviving on surfaces without soil.
Statement 3 is correct: Mosses are nonvascular plants. They do not need soil to survive, instead they have a rhizoid multi-cell anchoring structure that is used to climb and grip over rocky surfaces. Moss thrives in moist and shady areas.
Statement 4 is incorrect: A mushroom is the fleshy, spore-bearing fruiting body of a fungus, typically grows above ground, on soil, etc.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following kinds of organisms:

Copepods
Cyanobacteria
Diatoms
Foraminifera

Which of the above are primary producers in the food chains of oceans?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 and 3
- (c) 3 and 4
- (d) 1 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Food chain
Option (b) is the correct answer: Cyanobacteria and Diatoms are primary producers in the food chains of oceans.
Copepods:

Any member of the widely dispersed crustacean subclass Copepoda is referred to as one of them.
Free-living copepods form a crucial link in the food chain and are often assigned the role of “primary consumers”.
Copepods play a significant ecological role by feeding numerous fish species.

Cyanobacteria:

Cyanobacteria, also called blue-green algae, are microscopic organisms found naturally in all types of water.
These single-celled organisms live in fresh, brackish (combined salt and fresh water), and marine water.
These organisms use sunlight to make their own food.

Diatoms:

Diatoms are photosynthesizing algae, they have a siliceous skeleton (frustule) and are found in almost every aquatic environment including fresh and marine waters, soils, in fact almost anywhere moist.
They are not mobile or can only move a small distance along a substrate by secreting mucilaginous material along a raphe, which is a groove or canal that resembles a slit.
Since they are autotrophic, they can only exist in the photic zone (water depths down to about 200m depending on clarity).

Foraminifera:

These are any unicellular organism of the rhizopodan order Foraminiferida (formerly Foraminifera), characterized by long, fine pseudopodia that extend from a uninucleated or multinucleated cytoplasmic body encased within a test, or shell.
All maritime environments contain foraminifera, which can be either planktic or benthic in nature.
In a variety of maritime habitats, foraminifera have been observed to feed mostly on bacteria, tiny diatoms, and nanoplankton.

Statement 1 is incorrect: Free-living copepods form a crucial link in the food chain and are often assigned the role of “primary consumers”.
Statement 2 is correct: Cyanobacteria, also called blue-green algae, are microscopic organisms found naturally in all types of water. These organisms use sunlight to make their own food.
Statement 3 is correct: Diatoms are photosynthesising algae. They are found in almost every aquatic environment including fresh and marine waters. They are primary producers in oceanic food chain.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Foraminifera are found in all marine environments, they may be planktic or benthic in their mode of life. Foraminifera are recorded as feeding chiefly upon bacteria, small diatoms, and nanoplankton in a wide variety of marine environments.**

---

### Question 3

Which of the following are detritivores?

Earthworms
Millipedes
Woodlice
Jellyfish
Seahorses

Select the correct answer using the code given below

- (a) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (b) 2, 3, 4 and 5 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Food Chain
Option (c) is the correct answer: Earthworms, Millipedes and Woodlice are Detritivores.

Detritivores also known as detritivores, detritophages, detritus feeders, or detritus eaters are heterotrophs that obtain nutrients by consuming detritus (decomposing plant and animal parts as well as faeces).
By doing so, all these detritivores contribute to decomposition and the nutrient cycles.
Detritivores are an important aspect of many They can live on any type of soil with an organic component, including marine ecosystems, where they are termed interchangeably with bottom feeders.
Typical detritivorous animals include earthworm, millipedes, springtails, woodlice, dung flies, slugs, many terrestrial worms, sea stars, sea cucumbers, fiddler crabs, and some sedentary polychaetes such as worms of the family Terebellidae.**

---

### Question 4

In which one of the following biogeochemical cycles, the weathering of rocks is the main source of release of nutrients to enter the cycle?

- (a) Carbon cycle
- (b) Nitrogen cycle
- (c) Phosphorus cycle
- (d) Sulphur cycle
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Biogeochemical Cycles
Option (c) is the correct answer: Phosphate ions and other minerals gradually leak out of rocks as a result of weathering and rain.
Phosphorus Cycle:

The phosphorus cycle (unlike the carbon and nitrogen cycles) lacks an atmospheric component. Phosphorus is one of the most important nutrients in biological systems since it is a fundamental ingredient of nucleic acids, phospholipids, and several phosphorylated compounds.



Phosphate ions and other minerals gradually leak out of rocks as a result of weathering and rain. This inorganic phosphate is subsequently distributed in soils and water.
Plants take up inorganic phosphate from the soil and then these plants are consumed by animals. Phosphate is incorporated into organic molecules such as DNA in plants and animals. When the plants and animals die, it decays, and the organic phosphate is returned to the soil.
In the soil, organic forms of phosphate can be made available to plants by bacteria that break down organic matter into inorganic forms of This process is known as mineralisation.
Phosphorus from the soil can enter streams and eventually the seas. It can then be absorbed into sediments over time.**

---

### Question 5

Which of the following have species that can establish a symbiotic relationship with other organisms?

Cnidarians
Fungi
Protozoa

Select the correct answer using the code given below

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Species Interaction
Option (d) is the correct answer: All species can establish a symbiotic relationship with other organisms.
Symbiotic Relationship:

A relationship between two (or more) species that may or may not be advantageous to one or both is referred to as symbiotic. The organisms could belong to the same species or to separate ones.
For eg., Coral has a symbiotic relationship (each gives something to the other and gets something back in return) with ‘zooxanthellae’ microscopic algae which live on coral.

Option 1 is correct: The relationship between cnidarians and dinoflagellate algae is termed “symbiotic” because both the animal host and the algae are benefiting from the association. It is a mutualistic interaction.
Option 2 is correct: Two common mutualistic relationships involving fungi are mycorrhiza (fungi and plant roots) and lichen (fungi and either cyanobacteria or green algae).
Option 3 is correct: Protozoa mostly represent a close mutualistic association between a protozoan and unicellular symbiont such as bacteria, cyanobacteria or/and unicellular algae or protozoans and a multicellular organisms such as ruminants, lower termites, wood-eating cockroaches, plants.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to the water on the planet Earth, consider the following statements:

1. The amount of water in the rivers and lakes is more than the amount of groundwater.

2. The amount of water in polar ice caps and glaciers is more than the amount of groundwater.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 Only
- (b) 2 Only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Water Conservation
Water Resources:

71 % of earth surface constitutes water & only 29 % constitutes a land area of earth
97 % of water area constitutes Oceans & Seas & 2.5 % as freshwater
75 % of freshwater in glaciers & ice caps
7 % of freshwater is groundwater
Fresh Water → Glaciers > Groundwater> Ice & Snow > Lakes






NOTE: This question is repeated from 2013. Also, it is a direct question from Class 7 NCERT (Geography).**

---

### Question 7

Which one of the following is used in preparing a natural mosquito repellent?

- (a) Congress grass
- (b) Elephant grass
- (c) Lemongrass
- (d) Nut grass
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Biodiversity/Everyday Science
Option (c) is the correct answer: Lemongrass is used in preparing a natural mosquito repellent.

In tropical and subtropical regions of Asia, Africa, and Australia, it is a tall herb that is widely distributed. Lemongrass is most frequently produced in China and India.
The lemongrass herb is well known for its effectiveness at warding off mosquitoes, it works as a mosquito repellent. It contains the chemical citronella, which aids in disguising the smells that mosquitoes use to target victims.
A 2011 study found that the strong odour of lemongrass oil effectively killed or fully repelled 95% of the mosquitoes from a particular range of species.**

---

### Question 8

The vegetation of savannah consists of grassland with scattered small trees, but extensive areas have no trees. The forest development in such areas is generally kept in check by one or more or a combination of some conditions. Which of the following are such conditions?

Burrowing animals and termites
Fire
Grazing herbivores
Seasonal rainfall
Soil properties

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 4 and 5
- (c) 2, 3 and 4
- (d) 1, 3 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Biomes
Savannah Biome:

It is a particular kind of grassland biome made up of vast expanses of open grassland with few trees.
There are two kinds of savannahs:

Tropical savannahs
Semi-tropical



Geographical Location:

All continents excluding Antarctica have
The largest savannahs are found close to the equator in Africa.
Serengeti National Park in Tanzania, which is well-known for its enormous wildebeest and zebra populations, is one of the most well-known African savannahs.
The park is also home to lions, leopards, elephants, hippos, and gazelles.

Statement 1 is incorrect: The savannah biome relies on their herd numbers and speed for survival, as the vast open areas provide little means of escape from quick predators.
Statement 2 is correct: The combination of high temperatures and little precipitation makes savannahs perfect areas for grass and brush fires during their dry seasons.
Statement 3 is correct: Many of the savannah biome animals are grazing herbivores that migrate through the region.
Statement 4 is correct: Savannah regions have two distinct seasons – a wet season and a dry season. There is very little rain in the dry season. In the wet season vegetation grows, including lush green grasses and wooded areas.
Statement 5 is incorrect: Soil properties influence the type of savannah and its vegetation but don’t contribute to checking it once formed.**

---

### Question 9

How is permaculture farming different from conventional chemical farming?

1. Permaculture farming discourages monocultural practices but in conventional chemical farming, monoculture practices are predominant.

2. Conventional chemical farming can cause an increase in soil salinity but the occurrence of such a phenomenon is not observed in permaculture

3. Conventional chemical farming is easily possible in semi-arid regions but permaculture farming is not so easily possible in such regions.

4. Practice of mulching is very important in permaculture farming but not necessarily so in conventional chemical farming.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 3
- (b) 1, 2 and 4
- (c) 4 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Sustainable Agriculture
Statement 1 is correct: Permaculture is a totally integrated design system that’s modelled on nature. Permaculture farming promotes multi-cropping and integrated farming systems. While chemical farming is more suitable for monoculture cropping due to the use of crop- specific inputs like irrigation, chemical fertiliser and harvesting methods.
Statement 2 is correct: Conventional farming usually alters the natural environment, increases soil salinity, and eliminates biodiversity. Such problems are not seen in permaculture farming as it relies on organic fertilizers.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Chemical farming is based on the intense use of inputs like chemical fertilizers and irrigation that make the soil less fertile over time, thus restricting its practice in semi-arid regions. Thus, conventional farming is not suitable for semi-arid regions. Permaculture involves well-designed systems that don’t produce waste and permaculture tries to imitate well-designed systems. Thus, it can work in arid climates as well.
Statement 4 is correct: Mulching is an important component of Permaculture systems for promoting maximum efficiency.**

---

### Question 10

In the context of India’s preparation for Climate-Smart Agriculture, consider the following statements:

1. The ‘Climate-Smart Village’ approach in India is a part of a project led by the Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), an international research programme.

2. The project of CCAFS is carried out under the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) headquartered in France.

3. The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) in India is one of the CGIAR’s research centres.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Agriculture and Environment
Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA):

It is a strategy to assist those in charge of managing agricultural systems in efficiently adapting to climate change.
The CSA approach pursues the triple objectives of:




Sustainably increasing productivity and incomes
Adapting to climate change
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions where possible




The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1 & 2 envision a world with zero

Statement 1 is correct: The Climate-Smart Village project in India is a CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS).
Statement 2 is correct: Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCFAS) is carried out under CGIAR (formerly the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research).
Statement 3 is correct: ICRISAT is a CGIAR Research Center. It is a non-profit, non-political public international research organization that conducts agricultural research for development in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa with a wide array of partners throughout the world.**

---

### Question 11

Why is there a concern about copper smelting plants?

1. They may release lethal quantities of carbon monoxide into the environment.

2. The copper slag can cause the leaching of some heavy metals into the environment.

3. They may release sulphur dioxide as a pollutant.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Industrial Pollution
Copper Smelting:

It is a process of applying heat to ore in order to extract a base metal.
Smelting uses heat and a chemical reducing agent to decompose the ore, driving off other elements as gases or slag and leaving the metal base behind.
It is the method of extracting pure elemental copper (Cu) from copper concentrate (CuFeS2).
Some facilities that carry out metal and smelting processes are known to emit high quantities of air pollutants such as hydrogen fluoride, sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, offensive and noxious smoke fumes, vapours, gases, and other toxins.
A variety of heavy metals: Lead, arsenic, chromium, cadmium, nickel, copper, and zinc are also released by the facilities.

In addition, some smelting processes can also produce large quantities of solid waste, known as slag, which usually contains significant amounts of contaminants. This slag may leach heavy metals (arsenic, cadmium, lead or mercury depending on the composition of the ore) into groundwater reservoirs.



Statement 1 is incorrect: Copper smelting does not release lethal quantities of carbon monoxide into the environment.
Statement 2 is correct: Some smelting processes can also produce large quantities of solid waste, known as slag. This slag may leach heavy metals (arsenic, cadmium, lead or mercury depending on the composition of the ore) into groundwater reservoirs.
Statement 3 is correct: Smelting processes are known to emit high quantities of air pollutants such as hydrogen fluoride, sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, offensive and noxious smoke fumes, vapours, gases, and other toxins.**

---

### Question 12

With reference to furnace oil, consider the following statements:

It is a product of oil refineries.
Some industries use it to generate power.
Its use causes sulphur emissions into the environment.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Air Pollution/Emissions
Furnace oil:

Furnace oil or fuel oil is a dark viscous residual product of crude-oil It is used as a fuel in different types of combustion equipment.
The emissions of oxides of sulphur are a direct result of the sulphur content of the fuel oil.

Applications of Furnace oil:

Marine engines and slow speed engines for power generation;
Drying tea leaves;
Thermic fluid heaters and hot air generators

Statement 1 is correct: Furnace oil or fuel oil is a dark viscous residual product of crude-oil distillation. It is used as a fuel in different types of combustion equipment.
Statement 2 is correct: Marine engines and slow speed engines for power generation use Furnace oil.
Statement 3 is correct: The emissions of oxides of sulphur are a direct result of the sulphur content of the fuel oil.**

---

### Question 13

Magnetite par ticles, suspected to cause neurodegenerative problems, are generated as environmental pollutants from which of the following?

Brakes of motor vehicles
Engines of motor vehicles
Microwave stoves within homes
Power plants
Telephone lines

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2, 3 and 5 only
- (b) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (c) 3, 4 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Industrial Pollution
Option (b) is the correct answer: Brakes of motor vehicles, engines of motor vehicles, and power plants are sources of Magnetic Particles.
Magnetite particles:

Magnetite particles are a highly magnetic mineral form of iron and are known to be present in air pollution.
Exposure to airborne particulate matter (PM) is associated with pulmonary, cardiovascular and neurological 

Option 1 is correct: Vehicle brake systems are the major source of airborne magnetite at the roadside.
Options 2 and 4 are correct: Petrol and diesel- engine exhaust and power plants are also a source of airborne magnetite.
Options 3 and 5 are incorrect: There is no adequate evidence supporting the generation of magnetite particles from sources like microwave Stoves within homes and telephone lines.**

---

### Question 14

The ‘Common Carbon Metric’, supported by UNEP, has been developed for

- (a) Assessing the carbon footprint of building operations around the world
- (b) Enabling commercial farming entities around the world to enter carbon emission trading
- (c) Enabling governments to assess the overall carbon footprint caused by their countries
- (d) Assessing the overall carbon foot-print caused by the use of fossil fuels by the world in a unit time
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Air Pollution/Carbon Emission Option (a) is the correct answer: The carbon footprint of building operations is assessed through ‘Common Carbon Metric’.

The Common Carbon Metric is a protocol developed by United Nations Environment Program’s Sustainable Buildings & Climate Initiative (UNEP-SBCI) for measuring energy use & reporting GHG emissions from Building Operations.
Its purpose is to support greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reductions through accurate measurement of energy efficiency improvements in building operations.**

---

### Question 15

What is blue carbon?

- (a) Carbon captured by oceans and coastal ecosystems
- (b) Carbon sequestered in forest biomass and agricultural soils
- (c) Carbon contained in petroleum and natural
- (d) Carbon present in atmosphere
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Carbon Sink
Blue Carbon:

Carbon captured by the world’s ocean and coastal ecosystems.
Three types of coastal ecosystems — mangroves, seagrasses and tidal marshes — store half the “blue” carbon buried beneath the ocean floor.
These areas absorb and store carbon at a much faster rate than other areas, such as forests, and can continue to do so for millions of years.
The carbon found in coastal soil is often thousands of years old.

Blue Carbon Initiative:

Conservation International (CI), the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the Intergovernmental Oceanic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO has collaborated with governments and organisations across the world to develop mechanisms for ensuring coastal Blue Carbon ecosystems.

It also comprises:

Engagement of  local, national and international organisations
Comprehensive methods  for carbon accounting
Incentive mechanism
Scientific research for climate mitigation**

---

### Question 16

Consider the following animals:

Hedgehog
Marmot
Pangolin

To reduce the chance of being captured by predators, which of the above organisms rolls up/roll up and protects/protects its/their vulnerable parts?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Food Chain/Species
Statement 1 is correct: Hedgehogs are small mammals with short limbs and a body low to the ground. Their most distinctive characteristic is the thousands of stiff, sharp spines – harder and sharper than those of a porcupine – that cover the animal’s back and sides, like a pincushion filled with needles. If attacked they will curl into a prickly and unappetizing ball that deters most predators. IUCN Red List Status: Least concern
Statement 2 is incorrect: Marmot are any of 14 species of giant ground squirrels found primarily in North America and Eurasia. Marmots are well suited for life in cold environments and have small fur-covered ears, short, stocky legs, and strong claws for digging. Due to the absence of scales or spines, they do not roll up and protect their vulnerable parts. IUCN Red Listed as: Least Concern.
Statement 3 is correct: Pangolin, also called scaly anteaters because of their preferred diet, pangolins are the most trafficked mammal in the world. If touched or grabbed it will roll up completely into a ball, while the sharp scales on the tail can be used to lash out.**

---

### Question 17

Which one of the following is a filter feeder?

- (a) Catfish
- (b) Octopus
- (c) Oyster
- (d) Pelican
Explanation


**Ans: (c)
Sub-Theme: Species
Option (c) is the correct answer: Oyster is a Filter Feeder.
Filter feeders are a subgroup of suspension feeding animals that feed by straining suspended matter and food particles from water, typically bypassing the water over a specialised filtering structure. Clams, krill, sponges, oysters, baleen whales, and numerous fish are among the creatures that rely on this way of feeding (including some sharks). Filter feeders include some birds like flamingos and several varieties of duck. Filter feeders are regarded as ecosystem engineers since they might be crucial in the clarification of water. They serve as indicator organisms and are crucial in bioaccumulation.**

---

### Question 18

With reference to ‘palm oil’, consider the following statements:

1. The palm oil tree is native to Southeast Asia.

2. Palm oil is a raw material for some industries producing lipstick and perfumes.

3. The palm oil can be used to produce biodiesel.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Species
Palm Oil (Native to Africa)
Statement 1 is incorrect: Oil palm trees are native to Africa but were brought to South-East Asia over 100 years ago as an ornamental tree crop.
Statement 2 is correct: Non-food applications of Palm oil are Cosmetics, toiletries, soaps and detergents. Oleochemical industry, as a base material for laundry detergents, household cleaners and cosmetics.
Statement 3 is correct: Palm oil can be used to produce biodiesel, which can be used in compression ignition engines, i.e., diesel engines without any modifications.
Applications of Palm Oil



Food-based applications
Cooking oil, substitute for butter, vanaspati/ vegetable ghee, margarine, confectionery and bakery fats, ice cream, coffee creamers,              emulsiﬁers, vitamin E supplements among others.


Non-food applications
Cosmetics, toiletries, soaps and detergents. Oleochemical industry, as a base material for laundry detergents,    household cleaners and cosmetics. Also, Palm oil can be used to produce biodiesel.



 




NOTE: Recently, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has announced this new national initiative on palm oil and in August, 2021, Environmental activists and politicians have expressed concerns over the centre’s proposal to promote palm oil cultivation in the Northeastern states and in the Andaman and Nicobar islands. Hence, the question!!**

---

### Question 19

Consider the following statements:

Moringa (drumstick tree) is a leguminous evergreen tree.
The Tamarind tree is endemic to South Asia.
In India, most of the tamarind is collected as minor forest produce.
India exports tamarind and seeds of moringa.
Seeds of moringa and tamarind can be used in the production of biofuels.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1, 2, 4 and 5
- (b) 3, 4 and 5
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Species
Statement 1 is incorrect: Moringa is a fast- growing, drought-resistant tree native to the Indian subcontinent. Found in the wild in the sub- Himalayan regions of Northern India and now grown worldwide in the tropics and sub-tropics.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Tamarind is a leguminous tree bearing edible fruit that is indigenous to tropical Africa.
Statements 3 and 4 are correct: In India most of the Tamarind is collected as Minor Forest Produce with Minimum Support Price. Tamarind is also actively exported from India.
Statement 5 is correct: Biodiesel is derived from the tamarind seed through the transesterification process as potential alternative feedstock for the diesel engine.




NOTE:  Recently,  the  Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) has been supporting private entities in creating the necessary infrastructure to promote Moringa products exports from India. Hence, the question!**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

Consider the following statements

In the tropical zone, the western sections of the oceans are warmer than the eastern sections owing to the influence of trade winds.
In the temperate zone, westerlies make the eastern sections of oceans warmer than the western sections.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Wind Movement
Statement 1 is correct: The Trade winds originate from subtropical high pressure regions and move toward the equatorial low pressure belt. At the equator, the trade winds from the two hemispheres collide, rising and bringing torrential rainfall. The Northeast trade winds in the Northern hemisphere of the tropical zone move warmer water westward through the ocean. As a result of the cool ocean currents, the eastern regions of the trade winds are drier and more stable than the western parts of the ocean.
Statement 2 is correct: The westerlies are the winds blowing from the subtropical high pressure belts towards the sub polar low pressure belts.The Westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm, equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts of continents that is eastern section of the Oceans in the temperate zone.**

---

### Question 2

“Leaf litter decomposes faster than in any other biome and as a result the soil surface is often almost bare. Apart from trees, the vegetation is largely composed of plant forms that reach up into the canopy vicariously, by climbing the trees or growing as epiphytes, rooted on the upper branches of trees.”

This is the most likely description of

- (a) Coniferous forest
- (b) Dry deciduous forest
- (c) Mangrove forest
- (d) Tropical rainforest
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Major Climate of the World
Hot, Wet Equatorial Climate:

Hot, Wet Equatorial Climate is found between 5° and 10° north and south of the equator.
Precipitation is heavy and well distributed throughout the year.
From the air, the tropical rain forest appears like a thick canopy of foliage, broken only where it is crossed by large rivers or cleared for cultivation.
All plants struggle upwards (most epiphytes) for sunlight resulting in a peculiar layer arrangement, rooted on the upper branches of trees.
The equatorial vegetation comprises a multitude of evergreen trees that yield tropical hardwood, g. mahogany, ebony, dyewoods etc.


NOTE: UPSC has this habit of picking lines from GC Leong and frame it as a question. Please learn to pick the hints from the UPSC question, here in the above sentence observe the keywords like ‘Leaf litter decomposes faster’; ‘canopy’; ‘epiphytes’; etc. these are enough/sufficient hints to answer this question. Now if you have read NCERTs and GC Leong you could easily identify that these are the characteristics of ‘Tropical Rainforest’ or ‘Hot, Wet Equatorial Climate’.**

---

### Question 3

The black cotton soil of India has been formed due to the weathering of:

- (a) Brown forest soil
- (b) Fissure volcanic rock
- (c) Granite and schist
- (d) Shale and limestone
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Type of Soil
Option (b) is correct: The black cotton soils of India have been formed due to the weathering of the fissure volcanic rock.

                                                                                                         Major Soils Types**

---

### Question 4

Among the following, which one is the least water- efficient crop?

- (a) Sugarcane
- (b) Sunflower
- (c) Pearl millet
- (d) Red gram
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Water efficient crop
Option (a) is correct: Sugarcane requires around 1800 to 2200 mm and basically it is a heavy water intensive crop.
Option (b) is incorrect: Major oilseeds like soyabean, castor seeds, cotton seeds, linseed and sunflower, etc. requires around 672.4 mm.
Option (c) is incorrect: Millets can be grown even in dry regions without irrigation facilities. Pearl millets require around 350 mm of water.
Option (d) is incorrect: Pulses like red gram require around 200-450 mm of water.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to the Indus River system, of the following four rivers, three of them pour into one of them which joins the Indus directly. Among the following, which one is such a river that joins the Indus directly?

Chenab

- (b) Jhelum
- (c) Ravi
- (d) Sutlej
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Indus River System/Drainage
Option (a) is incorrect: The Chenab joins the Satluj in Panchnad(Pakistan) after receiving the waters of the Jhelum and Ravi rivers.
Option (b) is incorrect: The Jhelum joins the Chenab near Jhang in Pakistan.
Option (c) is incorrect: The Ravi debouches into the Chenab near Sarai Sidhu, a little above Rangpur in Pakistani Punjab.
Option (d) is correct: The Satluj receives the collective drainage of the Ravi, Chenab and Jhelum rivers. It joins the Indus a few kilometers above Mithankot.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to India, Didwana, Kuchaman, Sargol and Khatu are the names of

- (a) Glaciers
- (b) Mangrove areas
- (c) Ramsar sites
- (d) Saline lakes
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Physiography of India

A playa/salt lake or saline lake is a landlocked body of water that has a concentration of salts and other dissolved minerals significantly higher than most lakes. Didwana, Kuchaman, Sargol and Khatu are saline lakes of Rajasthan.

About Playas (Salt Lake):

Small lakes with flat floors and undrained basins in which water collects after rains and evaporates quickly are called playas., mostly saline.
Playas/Salt lake in Rajasthan: Sambhar, Didwana, Kuchaman, the Sargol and the Khatu**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following rivers:

Brahmani
Nagavali
Subarnarekha
Vamsadhara

Which of the above rise from the Eastern Ghats?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 and 4
- (c) 3 and 4
- (d) 1 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Peninsular Drainage (Small East Flowing Rivers)
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Brahmani river comes into existence by the confluence of the Koel and the Shankh rivers near Rourkela.
Statement 2 is correct: Nagavali River originates in Kalahandi District, in the Eastern Ghats.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Subarnarekha originates from the Ranchi Plateau in Jharkhand forming the boundary between West Bengal and Odisha in its lower course.
Statement 4 is correct: It is an east-flowing river that originates in the Kalahandi district of Odisha, Eastern Ghat, flows in Odisha, along its boundary with Andhra Pradesh and finally joins the Bay of Bengal at Kalingapatnam, Andhra Pradesh.**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

Which one of the following is likely to be the most inflationary in its effects?

- (a) Repayment of public debt
- (b) Borrowing from the public to finance a budget deficit
- (c) Borrowing from the banks to finance a budget deficit
- (d) Creation of new money to finance a budget deficit
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Inflation
Inflation is the rise in prices of goods and services within a particular economy wherein, the purchasing power of consumers decreases, and the value of the cash holdings erode. In India, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) measures inflation. Some causes that lead to inflation include the creation of new money to finance a budget deficit. A Budget Deficit refers to a situation where total expenditure exceeds the total revenue.
Other Causes that lead to inflation are: Increase in demand, reduction in supply, demand-supply gap, excess circulation of money, increase in input costs, devaluation of currency, rise in wages among others.




NOTE: This question came verbatim from PYQ 2013. Therefore, it underlines the importance of solving and analysing PYQs.**

---

### Question 2

Which of the following steps is most likely to be taken at the time of an economic recession?

- (a) Cut in tax rates accompanied by an increase in interest rate
- (b) Increase in expenditure on public projects
- (c) Increase in tax rates accompanied by reduction of interest rate
- (d) Reduction of expenditure on public projects
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Recession

A fall in the gross domestic product (GDP) for two or more consecutive quarters is often regarded as an economic recession.
Recessions are brought on by high interest rates because they reduce liquidity, or the quantity of money available for
An increase in expenditure on public projects will lead to an increase in investments, leading to an increase in GDP and income in the economy and in turn increase in demand, completing the virtuous cycle of

Additional Information:

Recession is a situation when an economy faces negative growth of GDP in two successive quarters. Cut in tax rates accompanied by an increase in interest rate can create a credit crunch in the economy, which will not be favourable at the moment for the economy.
When income is falling in the economy then an increase in tax rates accompanied by a reduction of interest rate is not desirable at the moment.
Reduction of expenditure on public projects in the time of recession will not be favourable as it will reduce the output of the economy.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the Indian economy, demand-pull inflation can be caused/increased by which of the following?

Expansionary policies
Fiscal stimulus
Inflation-indexing wages
Higher purchasing power
Rising interest rates

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (b) 3, 4 and 5 only
- (c) 1, 2, 3 and 5 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Types of Inflation
Demand-pull inflation is caused by an increase in demand and when the demand in the economy outgrows the supply in the economy. It can be summed up as a condition of “too much money chasing too few goods”. With reference to the Indian economy, demand- pull inflation can be caused/increased by the following:

Expansionary Policies: Money in the market rises when the government spends more freely. It leads to an increase in demand for the goods and fuels demand- pull inflation.
Fiscal Stimulus: It also increases the money in the market which leads to an increase in demand for the goods and fuels demand- pull inflation.
Inflation-Indexing Wages: It means wages are linked to the inflation which means wages move as inflation changes in the economy. Such indexing is provided to reduce the effect of inflation on wages. It can not lead to demand pull inflation in the
Higher Purchasing Power: Consumers feel more confidence and spend more when they have a better income. As a result, demand increases, driving up inflation.
Rising Interest Rates: It will reduce the money supply in the market. Borrowing money will become costlier, creating a credit crunch in the economy. So, it cannot cause demand to pull inflation in the economy.

Additional Information:

Effective change in the wages is zero and it does not increase/decrease purchasing power. So, it cannot lead to a demand to pull inflation in the economy.
Rising interest rates decrease the money supply in the economy. Also, due to this borrowing money becomes costly. So, it cannot cause demand-pull inflation in the**

---

### Question 4

.

Consider the following statements:

Other things remaining unchanged, market demand for a good might increase if

- (a) price of its substitute increases
- (b) price of its complement increases
- (c) the good is an inferior good and the income of the consumer increases
- (d) its price falls
Which of the above statements are correct?

- (a) 1 and 4 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Functions of Money Market

Statement 1 is correct: In the case of Substitute goods, demand for a good usually moves in the direction of the price of its substitutes. Since tea is a substitute for coffee, if the price of coffee increases, the consumers can shift to tea, and hence, the consumption of tea is likely to go up.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Goods that are consumed together are called Complementary goods such as tea and sugar, pen and ink etc. Since Pen and ink are used together, an increase in the price of pens is likely to reduce the demand for ink and a decrease in the price of ink is likely to increase the demand for Similar is the case with other compliments. With the increase in the price of complement, demand reduces.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Inferior goods are those goods demanded for which move in the opposite direction as the income of the consumer. As the income of the customer increases, the demand for inferior goods falls, and as the income decreases, the demand for them rises. E.g. coarse cereals.
Statement 4 is correct: As per Law of demand, When the price of the commodity decreases, demand for it rises.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following statements:

1. The Governor of the Reserve bank of India (RBI) is appointed by the Central Government.

2. Certain provisions in the Constitution of India give the Central Government the right to issue directions to the RBI in public interest.

3. The Governor of the RBI draws his power from the RBI Act.

Which of the above statements are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Role and Functions of RBI/Banking Appointment
Statement 1 is correct: According to Section 8 of RBI ACT 1934, A Governor and (not more than four) Deputy Governors are to be appointed by the Central Government. Statement 2 is incorrect: According to Section 7 of RBI ACT 1934, The Central Government may from time to time give such directions to the Bank as it may, after consultation with the Governor of the Bank, consider it necessary in the public interest. There is no such provision in the constitution of India.
Statement 3 is correct: The Governor of the RBI draws his power from the RBI Act 1934. RESERVE BANK OF INDIA:

Before RBI: The functions of a central bank were virtually done by the Imperial Bank of India.
It was established via the RBI act 1934, and started its operations from April 1, 1935 → statutory body. Similarly, SBI is also a statutory body deriving its legality from SBI Act 1955.
The RBI was initially a privately held bank rather than a government-owned
Following independence, the government enacted the Reserve Bank (Transfer to Public Ownership) Act of 1948, which allowed it to acquire the RBI from private owners after providing fair compensation.
The RBI was nationalised in 1949, and as of January 1, 1949, it operated as a government-owned bank.
It oversees the Indian financial sector and is the top monetary and banking authority in the nation.
Since it holds the reserves of all commercial banks, it is known as the “Reserve Bank.”




Monetary Authority
•   Formulates, implements and monitors the monetary policy.
•   Maintaining price stability while keeping in mind the objective of growth.


 
Regulator and Supervisor of the Financial System
•   Prescribes broad parameters of banking operations within which the country’s banking and financial system functions.
•   Regulation and supervision of banks under Banking Regulation Act 1949.
•   Regulation and supervision of non-banking financial companies.
•   Protecting depositors’ interest



 



Manager of Foreign Exchanges
•   Manages the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
•   It facilitates external trade and payment
•   Promote development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India.


 
Issuer of Currency
•   RBI has the sole right to issue currency notes in India.
•   Besides exchanges and destroys currency and coins not fit for circulation.
•   To give the public an adequate quantity of supplies of currency notes and coins and in good quality.


Developmental Role
•   Performs a wide range of promotional functions to support national objectives such as making institutional arrangements for rural or agricultural finance.


 
Financial Inclusion
•   The Reserve Bank has selected a bank led model for financial inclusion in India.
•   RBI has undertaken a series of policy measures. E.g. Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account” (BSBDA), JAM Trinity, etc.


 
Use of Technology
•   Devices such as ATMs, handheld devices to identify user accounts through a card and biometric identifier, Deposit taking machines and Internet banking and Mobile banking facility to provide the banking services to all sections of society with more ease.


Banker to Banks
•   It maintains banking accounts of all scheduled banks. It also acts as a lender of last resort by providing funds to banks.


Banker to Government
•   It performs merchant banking functions for the central and the state governments.
•   It is entrusted to the central govt. ‘s money, remittances, exchange and manages its public debt as well.



 



 
 
 
 
Governor of RBI
•   Appointment: Appointed after the proposal made by the Financial Sector Regulatory Appointments Search Committee (FSRASC), headed by the Cabinet Secretary.
•   Term: According to Section 8 (4) of the RBI Act, the Governor and Deputy Governors shall hold office for such term not exceeding 3 years as the Central Government may fix when appointing them.
•   Re-Appointment: They are eligible for re-appointment.
•   Qualification: The RBI Act does not provide for any specific qualification for the governor.
•   Removal: The governor can be removed by the central government.


 
Minimum Reserve System of RBI
•   With a minimum value of government-held gold of ₹ 200 crores (₹ 115 cr rupee should be in the form of gold or gold bullion and rest ₹ 85 cr should be in the form of foreign currencies) and the remaining is backed by the government securities issued and held by RBI.


 
 
Subsidiaries of RBI
•   Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC)
•   Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Private Limited (BRBNMPL)
•   Reserve Bank Information Technology Private Ltd. (ReBIT)
•   Indian Financial Technology and Allied Services (IFTAS)


 
 
 
 
Income and Expenditure of RBI
INCOME
EXPENDITURE


•   Returns from foreign currency assets
•   Interest on rupee-denominated government bonds
•   Interest on overnight lending to commercial banks
•   Management commission on handling the borrowings of central and state governments.
•   Printing of currency
•   Staff expenditure
•   Commission given to commercial banks.
•   Commission to primary dealers



 




ASSETS
LIABILITIES



•   Foreign currency assets
•   Currency held by Public


Assets and Liabilities of RBI
•   Bill purchases and discounts
•   Collaterals by commercial banks
•   Loan and advances
•   Vault cash held by commercial banks
•   Government securities
•   Other liabilities



•   Rupee securities




•   Gold coin bullion**

---

### Question 6

With reference to ‘Urban Cooperative banks’ in India consider the following statements:

They are supervised and regulated by local boards set up by the State Governments.
They can issue equity shares and preference shares.
They were brought under the purview of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 through an Amendment in 1966.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Cooperative Bank
Statement 1 is incorrect: After Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act 2020 was passed, all the powers were transferred to RBI from the Registrars of the cooperative societies. Even some powers are left with the registrar but RBI powers will override them.
Statement 2 is correct: RBI has issued guidelines allowing cooperative banks to raise funds through the issuance of equity shares, preference shares and debt instruments.
Statement 3 is correct: Large cooperative banks with paid-up share capital and reserves of Rs.1 lakh were brought under the purview of the Banking Regulation Act 1949 with effect from 1st March 1966.
CO-OPERATIVE BANKS

A Co-operative bank belongs to its members, who are at the same time the owners and the customers of their bank.
Under dual control of the RBI and Registrar of Cooperative Societies.
The board of members are elected with each member having one vote.
Agriculture, some small-scale businesses, and independent contractors primarily receive funding from cooperative banks.
These banks are cooperative credit institutions that are registered under the Cooperative Societies Act 1912. These banks work according to the cooperative principles of mutual assistance.
Co-operative banks have a three-tier structure:

Primary Credit Societies-PCSs (agriculture or urban).
District Central Co-Operative Banks-
State Co-Operative Banks-SCBs (at the apex level).**

---

### Question 7

In India, the central bank’s function as the ‘lender of last resort’ usually refers to which of the following?

Lending to trade and industry bodies when they fail to borrow from other sources
Providing liquidity to the banks having a temporary crisis
Lending to governments to finance budgetary deficits

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: RBI
Option (b) is correct: In India, the central bank’s function as the ‘lender of last resort’ usually refers to providing liquidity to banks that are facing temporary financial difficulties and are unable to meet their obligations. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) can lend money to these banks, either directly or through other channels, to help them meet their short-term liquidity needs and avoid a crisis. This function is important for maintaining financial stability in the banking system and ensuring that banks can continue to serve their customers even in times of stress.
Lender of Last Resort

A “lender of last resort” means that the RBI (also called banker of banks) offers loans to banks or other eligible institutions that are experiencing financial difficulty or are considered highly risky or near collapse.
This helps to protect individuals who have deposited funds and to prevent customers from withdrawing out of panic from banks with temporarily limited liquidity.
Commercial banks usually try not to borrow from the “lender of last resort” e. RBI because such action indicates that the bank is experiencing a financial crisis.**

---

### Question 8

The money multiplier in an economy increases with which one of the following?

- (a) Increase in the Cash Reserve Ratio in the banks
- (b) Increase in the Statutory Liquidity Ratio in the banks
- (c) Increase in the banking habit of the people
- (d) Increase in the population of the country
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Money Multiplier/Money Supply

The money multiplier is the amount of money created by banks for a given fixed amount of base money and reserve ratio. For example, if the commercial banks gain deposits of Rs1 Lakh and this leads to a final money supply of Rs 10 lakh. The money multiplier is 10.
An increase in the banking habit of the population will increase the lending, thereby will lead to more deposits in the banks hence increasing the money**

---

### Question 9

Which one of the following effects of the creation of black money in India has been the main cause of worry to the Government of India?

- (a) Diversion of resources to the purchase of real estate and investment in luxury housing
- (b) Investment in unproductive activities and purchase of precious stones, jewellery, gold,
- (c) Large donations to political parties and growth of regionalism
- (d) Loss of revenue to the State Exchequer due to tax evasion
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Black Money
Option (d) is correct: The creation of black money in India causes the loss of revenue to the State Exchequer due to tax evasion, which is the main cause of worry for the Government of India.

Black money is the money that comes from illegal activity or unreported activity (maybe legal).
The first category includes everything that is earned through illegal means and the second category includes everything that is not reported to tax authorities when the income of an individual or a firm is under- Shell companies are another major source of black money coming to an economy when companies evade the tax authorities by routing their income/profits through tax havens.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following statements:

The effect of the devaluation of a currency is that it necessarily:

Improves the competitiveness of domestic exports in the foreign markets.
Increases the foreign value of the domestic currency
Improves the trade balance

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: BoP
Statement 1 is correct: Devaluation is decreasing the value of currency within a fixed exchange rate system. Exports become cheaper to foreign customers. Thus, it improves the competitiveness of domestic exports in the foreign markets.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Devaluation of a currency decreases the foreign value of the domestic currency. Example- Let us assume that the prevailing exchange rate of $1 is 20 Rs. So currently 1 Rs is worth $0.05. If the devaluation of currency is done and now the exchange rate of $1 is 50 Rs, this means 1 Rs is worth $0.02. So, the value of domestic currency (Rs) is decreased in terms of value of foreign currency ($).
Statement 3 is incorrect: Balance of Trade (BOT) is the difference between the value of exports and imports of a country in a given period of time. When foreign loans are valued in the native currency, devaluation also raises the debt burden on those loans. Devaluation might not, then, ultimately lead to an improvement in the trade balance. Hence, statements 3 is incorrect.**

---

### Question 11

Consider the following:

Foreign currency convertible bonds
Foreign institutional investment with certain conditions
Global depository receipts
Non-resident external deposits

Which of the above can be included in Foreign Direct Investments?

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 2 and 4
- (d) 1 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: a          
Sub-Theme: Foreign Investment
Statements 1, 2 & 3 are correct: Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCB), Foreign Institutional Investment with certain conditions (overall limit of 24%), and Global Depository Receipts (GDR) are the instruments for foreign investment in India.
Statement 4 is incorrect: Non-resident external deposits will create debts in the balance of payment accounts, hence not a part
of FDI.**

---

### Question 12

Indian Government Bond Yields are influenced by which of the following?

Actions of the United States Federal Reserve
Actions of the Reserve bank of India
Inflation and short-term interest rates

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d          
Sub-Theme: Debt Instrument
Statement 1 is correct: Bond yield is the return an investor gets on that bond or on a particular government security. It depends on the price of the bond which is impacted by its demand. The actions of the US federal reserve can impact the investments flowing in India. This will lead to a decrease in demand for Government Securities (G-sec) and thus impacting its yield.
Statement 2 is correct: The actions of RBI directly impacts the bond yield because it is directly related to liquidity in the market which is controlled by RBI through various tools.
Statement 3 is correct: The purchasing capacity of an economy is directly related to inflation. So any change in short term rates will impact the demand and price of G-sec and thereby influencing the yield.**

---

### Question 13

With reference to India, consider the following statements:

Retail investors through Demat account can invest in ‘Treasury Bills’ and ‘Government of India Debt Bonds’ in the primary market.
The ‘Negotiated Dealing System-Order Matching’ is a government securities trading platform of the Reserve Bank of India.
‘Central Depository Services Ltd’ is jointly promoted by the Reserve Bank of India and the Bombay Stock Exchange.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b         
Sub-Theme: Debt Instrument
Statement 1 is correct: Bond yield is the return an investor gets on that bond or on a (T-Bills) and Government bonds. It is mandatory to open a Demat account for a retail investor to invest in ‘Treasury Bills’ and ‘Government of India Debt Bonds’ in the primary market.
Statement  2  is  correct:  The  Negotiated Dealing System Order Matching is an electronic trading platform operated by the Reserve Bank of India to facilitate the issuing and exchange of government securities and other types of money market instruments.
Statement 3 is incorrect: CDSL was promoted by BSE Ltd. jointly with leading banks such as State Bank of India, Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, HDFC Bank, Standard Chartered Bank and Union Bank of India.**

---

### Question 14

With reference to ‘Water Credit’, consider the following statements:

It puts microfinance tools to work in the water and sanitation sector.
It is a global initiative launched under the aegis of the World Health Organization and the World
It aims to enable poor people to meet their water needs without depending on subsidies.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Water Conservation
Statements 1 and 3 are correct: Water Credit is a powerful solution and the first to put microfinance tools to work in the water and sanitation sector. It helps bring small loans to those who need access to affordable financing and expert resources to make household water and toilet solutions a reality.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Water Credit Initiative is a loan program started by water.org to address the barrier of affordable financing for safe water and sanitation.**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

Which one of the following best defines the term ‘State?

- (a) A community of persons permanently occupying a definite territory independent of external control and possessing an organised government
- (b) A politically organized people of a definite territory and possessing an authority to govern them, maintain law and order, protect their natural rights and safeguard their means of sustenance
- (c) A number of persons who have been living in a definite territory for a very long time with their own culture, tradition and government
- (d) A society permanently living in a definite territory with a central authority, an executive responsible to the central authority and an independent judiciary
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Basic
The State refers to a political institution that represents a sovereign people organised under one independent government within a definite territory and subject to no outside control. Thus, a community of persons permanently occupying a definite territory independent of external control and possessing an organised government.**

---

### Question 2

Which one of the following factors constitutes the best safeguard of liberty in a liberal democracy?

- (a) A committed judiciary
- (b) Centralization of powers
- (c) Elected government
- (d) Separation of powers
Explanation


**Ans: d
The doctrine of Separation of Powers entails the division of the legislative, executive, and judicial functions of government among different This demarcation prevents the concentration of excessive power by any branch of the Government. It thus helps to safeguard the liberty and rights of the people in a democracy. In the Directive Principles of State Policy, Article 50 mentions separation of judiciary from the executive.
Additional Information:

Committed Judiciary: It means a judiciary committed to the policies of the government or ruling party; thus, it can’t protect the liberty of all people.
Centralization of Power: Liberal- democratic theory   assumes   that decentralization promotes democratic participation, especially local self- government.

Elected Government: Only having an elected government doesn’t safeguard liberty in liberal democracy. g., Pakistan.**

---

### Question 3

What is the position of the Right to Property in India?

- (a) Legal right available to citizens only
- (b) Legal right available to any person
- (c) Fundamental Right available to citizens only
- (d) Neither Fundamental Right nor legal right
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Right outside FR/Legal



Earlier, the Indian Constitution recognized the ‘Right to Property’ as a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(f) and Article 31. Later, Right to Property as a fundamental right was abolished by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1978 and made it a legal right under Article 300-A.
Article 300-A of the Constitutions states that “No person shall be deprived of his property save by Authority of Law”.
Thus, Right to Property in India is a legal right available to any person.**

---

### Question 4

Which one of the following in Indian polity is an essential feature that indicates that it is federal in character?

- (a) The independence of the judiciary is  safeguarded.
- (b) The Union Legislature has elected representatives from constituent units.
- (c) The Union Cabinet can have elected representatives from regional parties.
- (d) The Fundamental Rights are enforceable by Courts of Law.
Explanation


**Ans: a
 Sub-Theme: Forms of Government
The Indian Constitution adopts the federal system of Government, but with more tilt towards a unitary system of government. So, every state government does not have power of its own. Thus, it is considered as a quasi-federal system. The features of a federation are:

Two Government, division of powers,
Written Constitution,
Supremacy of Constitution,
Rigidity of Constitution,
Independent Judiciary and 
Bicameralism**

---

### Question 5

With reference to India, consider the following statements:

1. There is only one citizenship and one domicile.

2. A citizen by birth only can become the Head of State.

3. A foreigner once granted citizenship cannot be deprived of it under any circumstances.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Acquisition of Citizenship
Statement  1  is  correct: The Indian Constitution has the provision for single citizenship only, i.e., the Indian citizenship. India’s citizens only owe allegiance to the Indian Union. Additionally, the citizenship of an Indian citizen immediately expires when he or she voluntarily obtains the citizenship of another nation. In India, only one domicile is permitted. A single State or UT may only issue a Domicile Certificate.

Statement 2 is incorrect: In India, the Head of the State is the President and as per the Indian constitution both a citizen by birth as well as a naturalized citizen are eligible for the office of President. Thus, a naturalized citizen can also become the Head of the State in India.
Statement 3 is incorrect: A foreigner who has previously received Indian citizenship, can be deprived of his citizenship. Indian citizenship can be terminated by the Central government, if:
obtained the citizenship by
shown disloyalty to the Constitution of India
unlawfully exchanged goods or information with the enemy while at war.
two years of imprisonment in any country within five years of registration or
been ordinarily resident out of India for seven years continuously.**

---

### Question 6

Under the Indian Constitution, concentration of wealth violates

- (a) the Right to Equality
- (b) the Directive Principles of State Policy
- (c) the Right to Freedom
- (d) the Concept of Welfare
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Socialist Principles
Option (b) is correct: Part IV of the Constitution of India, spanning article 36 to 51, deals with the Directive Principles of State Policy. Article 39 of Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) clearly says that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
Additional Information:
Right to Equality: Articles 14 to 18 deals with ‘Right to Equality’ –



Equality before Law (Article 14)
Prohibition of discrimination based on grounds of religion, race, caste etc. (Article 15)
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment (Article 16)
Abolition of Untouchability (Article 17)
Abolition of titles (Article 18)



Right to Freedom: Article 19 – 21 deals with ‘Right to Freedom’ – Protection of six rights regarding freedom of: (Article 19)

Speech and Expression
Assembly
Association
Movement
Residence
Profession

Protection in respect of conviction for offences (Article 20)
Protection of life and personal liberty (Article 21)
Concept of Welfare: It itself is a part of**

---

### Question 7

What was the exact constitutional status of India on 26th January, 1950?

- (a) A democratic Republic
- (b) A Sovereign Democratic Republic
- (c) A Sovereign Secular Democratic Republic
- (d) A Sovereign Socialist Secular Democratic Republic
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Key Words in the Preamble

The Preamble to the Indian Constitution is a brief introductory statement that reflects the hopes and aspirations of the people.
The ideals behind the Preamble to Indian Constitution is based on ‘Objective Resolution’ which were drafted by Jawaharlal Nehru and adopted by the Constituent Assembly on January 22, 
The original Preamble, adopted by the Constituent Assembly in 1949, declared India a “Sovereign Democratic Republic”. Later, it was amended by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act (1976), and added three new words– “Socialist, Secular and Integrity”.**

---

### Question 8

Right to Privacy’ is protected under which Article of the Constitution of India?

- (a) Article 15
- (b) Article 19
- (c) Article 21
- (d) Article 29
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Right to Privacy
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution deals with the protection of life and personal liberty. In the KS Puttaswamy Case (2017), the Supreme Court held that privacy is a natural right that inheres in all natural persons, and that the right may be restricted only by state action that passes each of the three tests:

Such state action must have a legislative
It must be pursuing a legitimate state purpose; and
It must be proportionate.




NOTE: There are very much-repeated questions around and about Right to Privacy (among other provisions from FR as well) in one way or another. It is advisable to read Fundamental Rights very carefully and from a broader perspective.**

---

### Question 9

A legislation which confers on the executive or administrative authority an unguided and uncontrolled discretionary power in the matter of application of law violates one of the following Articles of the Constitution of India?

- (a) Article 14
- (b) Article 28
- (c) Article 32
- (d) Article 44
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Rule of Law
A legislation which confers on the executive or administrative authority an unguided and uncontrolled discretionary power in the matter of application of law violates Article 14 of the constitution.
The Article 14 of the Indian Constitution denotes that the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. The concept of ‘equality before law’ is an element of the concept of ‘Rule of Law’.
Rule of Law:

The concept of ‘equality before law’ as enshrined in Article 14 of Indian Constitution is taken from the concept of ‘Rule of Law’ propounded by V. Dicey.
Rule of law is a legal principle that states that a country should be ruled by the law rather than by the arbitrary actions of particular government officials.
Rule of law is part of the basic structure of the constitution.

The ‘Rule of Law’ has 3 fundamental principles:

Absence of arbitrary power
Equality before law
Primacy of individual rights

From the above concept we came to know that ‘equality before law’ under Article 14 connotes the absence of arbitrary power with the authorities. Therefore, when a legislation confers uncontrolled discretionary powers on any authority, it tends to violate Article 14 of the constitution.**

---

### Question 10

Constitutional government means:

- (a) a representative government of a nation with federal structure
- (b) a government whose Head enjoys nominal powers
- (c) a government whose Head enjoys real powers
- (d) a government limited by the terms of the Constitution
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: System of Government
The Constitutional Government is defined by the existence of a Constitution The idea behind constitutionalism is to place restrictions on the authority of state so that it does not become autocratic and also to protect the interest of individual liberty. In India the powers of the government are limited by means of the Fundamental Rights enshrined in the Part III of the Indian Constitution, which are essentially given to us against the state actions.



NOTE: Also asked in 2014 and 2020, therefore please do refer to the earlier solution/ explanations.**

---

### Question 11

We adopted parliamentary democracy based on the British model, but how does our model differ from that model?

1. As regards legislation, the British Parliament is supreme or sovereign but in India, the power of the Parliament to legislate is limited.

2. In India, matters related to the constitutionality of the Amendment of an Act of the Parliament are referred to the Constitution Bench by the Supreme Court.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: (c) 
Sub-Theme: System of Government
Statement 1 is correct: Indian Parliamentary system is based on constitutional supremacy, hence power of the Parliament to legislate is limited. Whereas the British Model is based on Parliamentary sovereignty. So, as regards the legislation, the British Parliament is supreme. 
Statement 2 is correct: According to the Constitution, Parliament and the state legislatures in India have the power to make laws within their respective jurisdictions. This power is not absolute in nature. The Constitution vests in the judiciary, the power to adjudicate upon the constitutional validity of all laws.
Additional Information:




DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INDIAN & BRITISH MODELS



Indian Model
British Model


•   Republican system: Head of State
(President) is indirectly elected.
•   Monarchical system: Head of State (King/Queen) is
hereditary.



 



•   Constitutional supremacy
•   The PM may be a member of any of the houses.
•   A person who is not a member of any house can be appointed as minister, but only for six months.
•   No system of legal responsibility of ministers. Ministers are not required to countersign the official acts.
•   No Shadow Cabinet
•   Parliamentary sovereignty
•   The PM should be a member of the Lower House.
•   Usually, members of parliament are appointed as ministers.
•   System of legal responsibility of the minister. Ministers are required to countersign the official acts.
•   Shadow Cabinet by opposition: to balance the ruling cabinet and prepare its members for future ministerial office.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following statements:

1. In India, there is no law restricting the candidates from contesting in one Lok Sabha election from three constituencies.

2. In the 1991 Lok Sabha Election, Shri Devi Lal contested from three Lok Sabha constituencies.

3. As per the existing rules, if a candidate contests in one Lok Sabha election from many constituencies, his/her party should bear the cost of bye-elections to the constituencies vacated by him/her in the event of him/her winning in all the constituencies.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b        
Sub-Theme: People’s Representation
This Question was cancelled by UPSC. Probable Solution: (b)

Statement 1 is incorrect: The amendment of RPA in 1996 restricted the number of seats one candidate could contest in one election to two constituencies. And whenever they have won more than one, the candidates have retained only one, forcing bypolls in the rest.
Statement 2 is correct: In 1991 Lok Sabha Election, Shri Devi Lal contested from three Lok Sabha constituencies.
Statement 3 is incorrect: There is no such provision. If a candidate is contesting from more than one constituency, he has to lodge a separate return of election expenses for every election which he has contested. In every case, the Election Commission of India (ECI) bears the cost of elections/bye-elections in all the constituencies in Lok Sabha and assembly elections as well.**

---

### Question 13

With reference to Indian judiciary, consider the following statements:

1. Any retired judge of the Supreme Court of India can be called back to sit and act as a Supreme Court judge by the Chief Justice of India with prior permission of the President of India.

2. A High Court in India has the power to review its own judgement as the Supreme Court does.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Constitutional Provisions Pertaining to Supreme Court/Jurisdiction and Powers of High Court

Statement 1 is correct: As per Article 128 of the Constitution, the Chief Justice of India may, at any time, with the previous consent of the President, can request a retired judge of the Supreme Court or a retired judge of a high court to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court for a temporary period. Such a judge is entitled to such allowances as the president may determine. He will also enjoy all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of a judge of the Supreme Court.
Statement 2 is incorrect: High Court does not has power to review and correct its own judgement. Thus, it is bound by its previous decision.**

---

### Question 14

At the national level, which ministry is the nodal agency to ensure effective implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006?

- (a) Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
- (b) Ministry of Panchayati Raj
- (c) Ministry of Rural Development
- (d) Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Explanation


**Ans: d          
Sub-Theme: National Commission for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes & Backward Classes
Option (d) is correct: The Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) is the nodal agency for the implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. The ministry deals with forest and livelihood objectives at the national level.**

---

### Question 15

With reference to the Union Government, consider the following statements:

1. The Gopalaswamy Iyenger Committee suggested that a minister and a secretary be designated solely for pursuing the subject of administrative reform and promoting it.

2. In 1970, the Department of Personnel was constituted on the recommendation of the Administrative Reforms Commission, 1966, and this was placed under the Prime Minister’s charge.

Which of the statements given above is/ are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b        
Statement 1 is incorrect: In the report ‘Reorganisation of the Machinery of Central Government’ (1950) Sh. N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar, suggested the grouping of ministries, improvement in the capabilities of the personnel, and also in the working of the Organisation and Method (O&M) Division. It nowhere mentions that a minister and a secretary be designated solely for pursuing the subject of administrative reform and promoting it. Moreover, it was the 1st ARC that suggested a minister and a secretary be designated solely for pursuing the subject of administrative reform and promoting it.
 Statement 2 is correct: In 1970, on the basis of the recommendations of the Administrative Reforms Commission, the Department of Personnel was set up under the charge of Cabinet Secretariat. In 1985, it was placed under the overall charge of the Prime Minister assisted by a Minister of State.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

In the first quarter of the seventeenth century, in which of the following was/were the factory/factories of the English East India Company located?

Broach
Chicacole
Trichinopoly

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2
- (c) 3 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Factories of English East India Company
The English East India Company had a factory at Broach (present-day Bharuch) in Gujarat, India during the seventeenth century. However, Chicacole (present-day Srikakulam) and Trichinopoly (present-day Tiruchirappalli) were not among the locations of the Company’s factories during this period. Establishment of Factories by English East India Company:

West Coast: The English India Company established their factories at Agra, Ahmadabad, Baroda and Broach by 1619, under the control of the president and council of the Surat factory which was established in the year 1612.


South-eastern Coast: EIC established their factories at Masulipatam in 1611 and Armagaon near Pulicat in 1626.
Eastern India: In eastern India EIC established their factories at Hariharpur and Balasore(now Odisha) in 1633, at Hugli in 1651, followed by setting up factories at Patna, Dacca, Kasimbazar in Bengal and Bihar respectively.




NOTE: This is a direct question asked from Spectrum Modern India (revised edition)**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements:

The Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms of 1919 recommended granting voting rights to all the women above the age of 21.
The Government of India Act of 1935 gave women reserved seats in the legislature.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Administrative Reforms post 1857
Montagu-Chelmsford Act, 1919:

By demarcating and separating the central and provincial subjects, it relaxed the central control over the provinces
Divided the provincial subjects into two parts:

Transferred and Reserved subjects: This dual scheme of governance was known as ‘dyarchy’.


Introduced bicameralism and direct elections in the country.
It required 3 out of 6 members in the Viceroy’s Executive Council to be Indian.
Recommended the voting rights to women in limited numbers to be extended on the basis of property, tax or education
Extended the principle of communal representation among the Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans.

Government of India Act of 1935 Features:

Act divided the powers between the Centre and units in terms of three lists—Federal List (for Centre, with 59 items), Provincial List (for provinces, with 54 items) and the Concurrent List (for both, with 36 items). Residuary powers were given to the Viceroy.

However, the federation never came into being as the princely states did not join it.


It abolished dyarchy in the provinces and introduced ‘provincial autonomy’ in its place. The provinces were allowed to act as autonomous units of administration in their defined spheres.

Moreover, the Act introduced responsible governments in provinces, that is, the governor was required to act with the advice of ministers responsible to the provincial legislature. This came into effect in 1937 and was discontinued in 1939.


It provided for the adoption of dyarchy at the Centre.

Consequently, the federal subjects were divided into reserved subjects and transferred subjects.
However, this provision of the Act did not come into operation at all.


It introduced bicameralism in six out of eleven provinces. Thus, the legislatures of Bengal, Bombay, Madras, Bihar, Assam and the United Provinces were made bicameral consisting of a legislative council (upper house) and a legislative assembly (lower house).
It extended the principle of separate electorates for depressed classes (scheduled castes), women and labour (workers).
It abolished the Council of India, established by the Government of India Act of 1858. The secretary of state for India was provided with a team of advisors.
Extended franchise: About 10 per cent of the total population got the voting right.
It provided for the establishment of a Reserve Bank of India to control the currency and credit of the country.
It provided for the establishment of not only a Federal Public Service Commission but also a Provincial Public Service Commission and Joint Public Service Commission for two or more provinces.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to 8th August 1942 in Indian history, which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) The Quit India Resolution was adopted by the AICC.
- (b) The Viceroy’s Executive Council was expanded to include more Indians.
- (c) The Congress ministries resigned in seven provinces.
- (d) Cripps proposed an Indian Union with full Dominion Status once the Second World War was over.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Quit India Movement
Option (a) is correct: Quit India Resolution was ratified in a Congress meeting at Gowalia Tank on 8th August 1942. Apart from QIM, other resolutions involved the Civil Disobedience Movement against British Rule. Mantra of “Do or Die” was adopted in this Session by Gandhiji. Option (b) is incorrect: More Indians were added to Viceroy’s executive council by the Government of India Act 1919. First time, an Indian was added in this council by the Government of India act 1909.
Option (c) is incorrect: The Congress Ministries resigned from seven provinces in 1939 in protest because the then Viceroy Lord Linlithgow’s (1936-1944) action declared India to be belligerent in the WW-II without even consulting the Indian people.
Option (d) is incorrect: Though Cripps proposed a dominion status to India and the failure of the cripps mission resulted in a nationwide Quit India Movement, this was not related to 8 August 1942.**

---

### Question 4

In the context of Colonial India, Shah Nawaz Khan, Prem Kumar Sehgal and Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon are remembered as:

- (a) leaders of Swadeshi and Boycott Movement
- (b) members of the Interim Government in 1946
- (c) members of the Drafting Committee in the Constituent Assembly
- (d) officers of the Indian National Army
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Indian National Army/Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose/Red Fort Trial
Indian National Army (INA) Trials/ Red Fort Trials:

Between November 1945 and May 1946, the INA officers were brought before a court martial at the Red Fort in Delhi. At the Red Fort in Delhi, about ten court-martials were held in public.
By holding open trials in the Red Fort, Claude Auchinleck, the commander-in-chief of the British-Indian army, hoped to sway public opinion against the INA.
Major General Shah Nawaz Khan, Colonel Prem Kumar Sahgal and Colonel Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon were three of the senior-most officers of INA and trusted colleagues of Netaji.
After considerable demonstrations and unrest in India, they were forced to be released after the British court-martialed them at Red Fort in 1945 and sentenced them to death.
Congress leader and the country’s first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, also got on board the INA officers’ legal defence team, along with party colleague Bhulabhai Desai and barrister Tej Bahadur Sapru.




NOTE: As we have already discussed, the trend of personality based questions continues !!**

---

### Question 5

Who among the following was associated as Secretary with Hindu Female School which later came to be known as Bethune Female School?

- (a) Annie Besant
- (b) Debendranath Tagore
- (c) Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
- (d) Sarojini Naidu
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Reforms in Education during the British Time
Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar (1820-1891) was appointed as the secretary of Bethune School/College established in 1849. Bethune School began as Hindu Female School in 1849 was renamed Bethune School in 1856. In 1856, the Government took charge of the Hindu Female School, later renamed Bethune School.
NOTE: Details of Annie Besant has already been covered in PYQs under Prominent Personalities in Modern History.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to Madanapalle of Andhra Pradesh, which one of the following statements is correct?

- (a) Pingali Venkayya designed the tricolour Indian National Flag here.
- (b) Pattabhi Sitaramaiah led the Quit India Movement of Andhra region from here.
- (c) Rabindranath Tagore translated the National Anthem from Bengali to English here.
- (d) Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott set up headquarters of Theosophical Society first here.
Explanation


**Ans: c          
Sub-Theme: Major events/Major places of Indian
Freedom Struggle
Option (a) is incorrect: The Indian tricolour was designed by Pingali Venkayya, who was a freedom fighter and was a follower of Mahatma Gandhi. Pingali Venkayya had designed the flag of India and presented it to Mahatma Gandhi in 1921 during the session of the All India Congress Committee in Vijayawada.
Option (b) is incorrect: During the QIM in Andhra the Provincial Congress Committee had issued a circular popularly known as the ‘Kurnool Circular’ as the police seized the copy when they rode ‘Kurnool Congress Office. This was drafted by Kala Venkat Rao, on 29th July 1942 and was sent for the approval of the Congress Working Committee through Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramaiah, a member of the working committee.
Option (c) is correct: Rabindranath Tagore translated the National Anthem from Bengali to English here.
Option (d) is incorrect: The Theosophical Society was founded by Madame H. P. Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott in New York in 1875. In 1882, the headquarters of the Society were established in Adyar, near Madras (now Chennai) in India.**

---

### Question 7

Who among the following is associated with ‘Song from Prison’, a translation of ancient Indian religious lyrics in English?

- (a) Bal Gangadhar Tilak
- (b) Jawaharlal Nehru
- (c) Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi
- (d) Sarojini Naidu
Explanation


**Ans: c        
Sub-Theme: Important Personalities/Phases of Mahatma Gandhi
Quit India Movement planned an all-out campaign to compel British withdrawal from India, after the failure of the Cripps Mission to reach a compromise. At the historic August meeting at Gowalia Tank in Bombay, Gandhi proclaimed his mantra—’do or die’. He was arrested on August 9, 1942. He undertook a 21-day fast in February 1943 to protest against the Government actions against Indians involved in the movement. Mahatma Gandhi wrote “Songs of Prison” during his imprisonment in Yerwada Jail, Poona. He translated hymns from the Upanishads and poems by Indian saint poets into English and that collection was published as Songs from the prison.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

Bollgard I and Bollgard II technologies are mentioned in the context of

- (a) Clonal propagation of crop plants
- (b) Developing genetically modified crop plants
- (c) Production of plant growth substances
- (d) Production of biofertilizers
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Genetics/Biotechnology/ GM Crops
Option (b) is correct:

Bollgard I (single-gene technology) is India’s first biotech crop technology (Genetically modified crop) approved for commercialization in India in 2002, followed by Bollgard II – (double-gene technology) in mid-2006.
Bollgard cotton has an insecticidal protein froma naturally occurring soil microorganism called Bacillus thuringiensis and offers built-in protection for cotton against destructive American Bollworm Heliothis Armigera infestations (Bt).
The enhanced double-gene Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab technology found in Bollgard II technology protects against bollworms and Spodoptera caterpillars, improving boll retention, maximising yield, using fewer pesticides, and preventing insect
NOTE: Biotechnology is an important part of Science and tech syllabus reading class 12 ncert and daily newspaper might come handy while answering such questions. Also, this issue was very much in the news, hence, UPSC asked the question.**

---

### Question 2

In the context of hereditary diseases, consider the following statements:

Passing on mitochondrial diseases from parent to child can be prevented by mitochondrial replacement therapy either before or after in vitro fertilization of the egg.
A child inherits mitochondrial diseases entirely from mother and not from father.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Disease transmission

Mitochondrial replacement therapy (MRT) also known as Mitochondrial Gene Therapy or Mitochondrial Donation is a new form of reproductive in-vitro fertilization (IVF) which works on the principle of replacing a women’s abnormal mitochondrial DNA (mt-DNA) with the donor’s healthy one.

Through the in vitro fertilization technique (IVF), the egg is then fertilized with the partner’s sperm. Thus the embryo remains free from any such defects.


Statement 1 is correct: The mitochondrial donation can be performed either prior to or shortly after fertilization. In both cases, this is done before the fertilized egg becomes an embryo.
Statement 2 is correct: Mitochondria is the only organelle in addition to the nucleus which contains DNA and genes. The sperm contains a very low number of mitochondria and mitochondrial genes. So, in the offspring, the mitochondrial genes are inherited from the mother. Thus, a father with a mitochondrial gene defect cannot transmit the disease to his offspring.**

---

### Question 3

The term ‘ACE2’ is talked about in the context of:

- (a) Genes introduced in the genetically modified plants
- (b) The development of India’s own satellite navigation system
- (c) Radio collars for wildlife tracking
- (d) The spread of viral diseases
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Disease transmission
Option (d) is correct: Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been discovered to be the SARS-CoV-2 virus’s receptor.

Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been discovered to be the SARS-CoV-2 virus’s receptor.
The coronavirus can enter a variety of human cells through this particular protein and spread infection.
Numerous cell types and tissues, such as the kidneys, liver, gastrointestinal system, blood arteries, lungs, and heart, all contain ACE2. It is found in epithelial cells, which line several tissues and build defences.
Across this epithelial lining in the lung, oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged between the lungs and blood vessels. The epithelium in the nose, mouth, and lungs contains ACE2.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following statements:

Adenoviruses have single stranded DNA genomes whereas retroviruses have double-stranded DNA genomes.
Common cold is sometimes caused by an adenovirus whereas AIDS is caused by a an adenovirus whereas AIDS is caused by a retrovirus.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Viral diseases

Statement 1 is incorrect: The icosahedral viruses known as adenoviruses (AdVs) have double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) genomes whereas retroviruses use RNA(Single stranded) as its genetic material.

Adenoviruses are a family of widespread viruses that affect your brain system, intestines, urinary tract, eyes, and airways. They are frequent causes of pink eye, diarrhoea, coughs, sore throats, and fever.


Statement 2 is correct: Common cold is caused by adenoviruses. HIV is classified as a retrovirus because it contains reverse transcriptase.\




NOTE: Viruses and health issues were in the news since the outbreak of Covid pandemic in 2020.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to recent developments regarding ‘Recombinant Vector Vaccine’, consider the following statements:

Genetic engineering is applied in the development of these vaccines.
Bacteria and viruses are used as vectors.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Vaccines and drugs

Recombinant vector vaccines are live replicating viruses that have been modified to carry additional genes taken from a pathogen; these additional genes produce the proteins we want to elicit immunity against.

The recombinant virus vector vaccine is one of the important emerging


Statement 1 is correct: The techniques of genetic engineering include creation of recombinant DNA, use of gene cloning and gene transfer.
Statement 2 is correct: Recombinant vector vaccines expose the body to proteins made by a virus or bacteria, and are often made by using weakened or inactive versions of that virus or bacteria.**

---

### Question 6

Which one of the following is a reason why astronomical distances are measured in light-years?

- (a) Distances among stellar bodies do not change.
- (b) Gravity of stellar bodies does not change.
- (c) Light always travels in a straight  line.
- (d) Speed of light is always the same.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Space technology
The Correct answer is Option (d):

Space distance is measured in terms of light years. Since the speed of light is known to be constant throughout the universe and for high precision, astronomical distances are expressed in terms of light-years. The fastest light can move is in a The symbol for the speed of light in a vacuum, c, is 3×108 m/s.
Astronomers calculate the distances of stars and other celestial objects in the time it takes for light to reach us since estimating distances in miles or kilometres is inadequate on the scale of the cosmos.**

---

### Question 7

In a pressure cooker, the temperature at which the food is cooked depends mainly upon which of the following?

Area of the hole in the lid
Temperature of the flame
Weight of the lid

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Basic and Everyday Science

Statement 1 is correct: The larger hole will lead to an increase in the steam going out leading to a greater reduction in temperature.
Statement 2 is correct: Temperature at which the food is cooked in a Pressure cooker is directly proportional to the temperature of the flame.
Statement 3 is correct: By increasing the surface pressure on the liquid inside the closed cooker we can raise the cooking temperature. This pressure can be adjusted by changing the weight placed on the top of the cooker lid.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following:

Bacteria
Fungi
Virus

Which of the above can be cultured in artificial/synthetic medium?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Basic and Everyday Science



The artificial culture media, also referred to as the growth medium, is a setting for the development of many kinds of microorganisms. The agarose and nutrients needed for the microorganism’s growth are present in the culture medium.
This medium is first sterilised to prevent contamination, which prevents the growth of undesirable microorganisms and ensures that it only contains the microbes of In artificial mediums, microbes like fungi and bacteria can be cultivated.
Statement 1 is correct: Aspergillus fumigatus, Alternaria penicillium notatum, Cladosporium herbarum, and Penicillium notatum were four key fungi for allergology that were cultivated on a pure synthetic media.
Statement 2 is correct: Nutrient agar is the media for bacteria that is most frequently Potato dextrose agar and Sabouraud dextrose agar are the two media that are most frequently used for fungus.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites that can only multiply in living Because viruses have no internal metabolic machinery and must replicate entirely within the host cell,they cannot be cultured in artificial culture conditions. Eukaryotic or prokaryotic host cells that have been infected can be cultivated, expanded, and the growth media can then be removed to obtain the virus**

---

### Question 9

With reference to street – lighting, how do sodium lamps differ from LED lamps?

Sodium lamps produce light in 360 degrees but it is not so in the case of LED lamps.
As street -lights, sodium lamps have a longer lifespan than LED lamps.
The spectrum of visible light from sodium lamps is almost monochromatic while LED lamps offer significant colour advantages in street lighting.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 3 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Basics and Everyday Science

Statement 1 is correct: Sodium lamps emit light in all directions i.e, 360 degree. Because at least half of the light must be reflected and redirected to the intended area of illumination, this technique is significantly inefficient. LEDs, however, emit light in all 180 degrees. Since light is frequently needed over a target region, this is usually advantageous (rather than all 360 degrees around the bulb).
Statement 2 is incorrect: High Pressure Sodium (HPS) lights or Sodium lamps have a typical lifespan for sodium lights or sodium lamps is in the range of 24,000 hours. At the halfway point of their lifespan, HPS lamps continue to provide 90% of their initial light output, according to American Electric Lighting. Lumen maintenance at the end of its useful life is still very good at 80%. LEDs have a longer lifespan than any other commercially available light source.
Statement 3 is correct: Monochromatic light means that the light has a single wavelength, for eg: sodium light. The LED light is not monochromatic because it is made up of different wavelengths, therefore is polychromatic.**

---

### Question 10

Bisphenol A (BPA), a cause of concern, is a structural/ key component in the manufacture of which of the following kinds of plastics?

- (a) Low-density polyethylene
- (b) Polycarbonate
- (c) Polyethylene terephthalate
- (d) Polyvinyl chloride
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Environmental Science/Everyday Science
The Correct answer is Option (b): About Bisphenol A (BPA):

Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical produced in large quantities for use primarily in the production of polycarbonate plastics. It is found in various products including shatterproof windows, eyewear, water bottles, and epoxy resins that coat some metal food cans, bottle tops, and water supply pipes.
Polycarbonates (PC) are a group of thermoplastic polymers containing carbonate groups in their chemical structures. Polycarbonates used in engineering are strong, tough materials, and some grades are optically transparent. They are easily worked, moulded, and thermoformed. Because of these properties, polycarbonates find many applications**

---

### Question 11

‘Triclosan’, considered harmful when exposed to high levels for a long time, is most likely present in which of the following?

- (a) Food preservatives
- (b) Fruit-ripening substances
- (c) Reused plastic containers
- (d) Toiletries
Explanation


**Ans: d 
Sub-Theme: Everyday Science
The Correct answer is Option (d): About Triclosan:

Triclosan is an ingredient added to many consumer products intended to reduce or prevent bacterial contamination. It is added to some antibacterial soaps and body washes, toothpastes, and some cosmetics.
Some short-term animal studies have shown that exposure to high doses of triclosan is associated with a decrease in the levels of some thyroid hormones. Other studies have raised the possibility that exposure to triclosan contributes to making bacteria resistant to antibiotics.**

---

### Question 12

Water can dissolve more substances than any other liquid because

- (a) It is dipolar in nature
- (b) It is a good conductor of heat
- (c) It has high value of specific heat
- (d) It is an oxide of hydrogen
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Basic Science
  The Correct answer is Option (a): About Water:

Water is called the “universal solvent” because it can dissolve more substances than any other liquid.
It is due to water’s chemical composition and physical attributes that it is such an excellent solvent. Water molecules have a polar arrangement of oxygen and hydrogen atoms—one hand (hydrogen) has a positive electrical charge and the other hand(oxygen) has a negative 
This makes it possible for the water molecule to attract a wide range of other molecular species. Water can develop a strong attraction to another substance, such as salt (NaCl), to the point where it can interfere with the attractive forces holding the sodium and chloride in the salt complex together and dissolve it.
In organic chemistry, a dipolar compound or simply dipole is an electrically neutral molecule carrying a positive and a negative charge in at least one canonical**

---

---

