# UPSC Prelims 2022 - Compiled Papers

## Ancient Medieval History

### Question 1

According to Kautilya’s Arthashastra, which of the following are correct?

A person could be a slave as a result of a judicial punishment.
If a female slave bore her master a son, she was legally free.
If a son born to a female slave was fathered by her master the son was entitled to the legal status of the master’s son.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Significance of Arthashastra
Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Arthashastra, any person who has voluntarily enslaved himself shall, if he runs away, be a slave for life. Similarly, any person whose life has been mortgaged by others shall, if he runs away twice, be a slave for life.
Statement 2 is correct: There was a variety of protection offered to the slaves, especially to the women slaves. As per the Arthashastra, when a child is begotten on a female slave by her master, both the child and its mother shall at once be recognized as free.
Statement 3 is correct: According to the Arthshastra, if a son born to a female slave was fathered by her master, the son was entitled to the legal status of the master’s son.**

---

### Question 2

With reference to Indian history, consider the following texts:

Nettipakarana
Parishishta Parvan
Avadanasataka
Trishashtilakshana Mahapurana

Which of the above are Jaina texts?

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 2 and 4 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d) 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Jain and Buddhist Literature/Text

Buddhist Literature/Texts: The earliest Buddhist works were written in Pali, which was spoken in Magadha and South Bihar. The Buddhist works can be divided into the canonical and non-canonical texts. Canonical texts are believed to be the actual words of the Buddha. Canonical texts are books which lay down the basic tenets and principles of Buddhism such as the Tripitakas. Non-canonical texts or semi-canonical texts are commentaries and observations on canonical texts, quotes, definitions, historical information, grammars and other writings in Pali, Tibetian, Chinese and other East Asian
Jain Literature/Text: The sacred books of the Jainas are collectively known as the Siddhanta or Agama. Both the Shvetambara and Digambara schools accept and give prime importance to the Angas. Agamas is a term used for Jaina canonical It includes: 14 Purvas; 12 Angas; 12 Upangas; 10 Prakirnas; 6 Cheda Sutras; 4 Mala Sutras; Niryuktis; Kalpasutra; Acharang Sutras; Nandi Sutra; Anuyogadvara.
Statement 1 is incorrect: The Netti Pakarana is a Buddhist scripture containing methods that were taught by the Buddha’s disciple Kaccana as approved by the Buddha and that it was recited at the First Buddhist Council.
Statement 2 is correct: The Parishishta Parvan (12th century) by Hemachandra gives a history of the earliest Jaina teachers and also mentions certain details of political history.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Avadana literature (Avadana means ‘Legends’) is a type of Buddhist literature correlating past lives’ virtuous deeds to subsequent lives’ events.
Statement 4 is correct: Trishashthilkshana Mahapurana is a major Jain text composed largely by Acharya Jinasena during the rule of Rashtrakutas.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to Indian history, consider the following pairs:

Historical person
Known as


1. Aryadeva
Jaina scholar


2. Dignaga
Buddhist scholar


3. Nathamuni
Vaishnava scholar

How many pairs given above are correctly matched?

- (a) None of the pairs
- (b) Only one pair
- (c) Only two pairs
- (d) All three pairs
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Scholars and Thinkers of Ancient India

Pair 1 is incorrect: A ryadeva was a Mahayana Buddhist monk, a disciple of Nagarjuna and a Madhyamaka philosopher. After Nagarjuna, he is considered to be the next most important figure of the Indian Madhyamaka school. His writings are important sources of Madhyamaka in both East Asian Buddhism and in Tibetan Buddhism.  A ryadeva  is  also  known as Kanadeva, recognized as the 15th patriarch in Chan Buddhism and some Sinhalese sources also mention an elder (thera) called Deva which may also be the same person. He is known for his association with the Nalanda monastery in modern-day Bihar, India.
Pair 2 is correct: Dignāga, Buddhist logician and  author of the Pramāṇasamuccaya (“Compendium  of  the Means    of True Knowledge”), a work that laid the foundations of Buddhist logic. Dignāga gave a new definition of “perception”: knowledge that is free from all conceptual constructions, including name and class concepts. Dignāga’s tradition was further developed in the 7th century by Dharmakīrti.
Pair  3   correct:   Sri    Ranganathamuni, popularly known as Sriman Nathamuni (823 CE–951 CE), was a Vaishnava theologian who collected and compiled the Nalayira Divya Prabandham. Considered the first of Sri Vaishnava āchāryās, Nathamuni is also the author of Yogarahasya, and Nyāyatattva.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following pairs:

Nannuka –           Chandela
Jayashakti           Paramara
Nagabhata II      Gurjara-Pratihara
Bhoja                  Rashtrakuta

How many pairs given above are correctly matched?

- (a) Only one pair
- (b) Only two pairs
- (c) Only three pairs
- (d) All four pairs
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Regional Dynasty
Pair 1 is correct: In the first quarter of the 9th century CE, the Chandella dynasty was founded by Nannuka.
Pair 2 is incorrect: Vakpati’s son’s Jayashakti (Jeja) and Vijayashakti (Vija) consolidated the Chandella power.
Pair 3 is correct: Nagabhata II (reigned c. 793–833) was Vatsaraja’s successor, he reorganized Pratihara power, attacked Kannauj. Pair 4 is incorrect: Bhoja I/Mihir Bhoja (c.836−885 CE) Grandson of Nagabhatta II, who had a long reign of over 46 years and proved to be the most successful and popular ruler of Pratiharas.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to Indian history, consider the following statements:

The first Mongol invasion of India happened during the reign of Jalalud- din Khalji.
During the reign of Ala-ud-din Khalji, one Mongol assault marched up to Delhi and besieged the city.
Muhammad-bin-Tughlaq temporarily lost portions of the north-west of his kingdom to Mongols.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Delhi Sultanate and the Mongol Invasion
Statement 1 is incorrect: The first Mongol invasion of India took place in the reign of Sultan Shams-ud-din Iltutmish.
Statement 2 is correct: During the reign of  Ala-ud-din  Khalji,  one  of  the  Mongol invasions reached till the outskirts of Delhi city and besieged it. Alauddin established a huge permanent, standing army to satisfy his ambition of conquest and to protect the country from Mongol invasion. The Mongols attacked at the worst time possible for Alauddin Khilji– when he was busy laying siege to Chittor. Alauddin Khilji was forced to retreat to Siri for about two months. The Mongols attacked and pillaged not only the surrounding areas, but Delhi itself. Alauddin Khilji continued to hold the fortress at Siri; Targhi withdrew the siege after a few months and left the area.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Muhammad-bin- Tughlaq defeated the Mongols and he had not lost any of the portions of his kingdom to them.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to Indian history, who of the following were known as “Kulah-Daran”?

- (a) Arab merchants
- (b) Qalandars
- (c) Persian calligraphists
- (d) Sayyids
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Sayyid Dynasty
Correct answer is Option (d):

The sayyids put on a pointed cap (kulah) and they were known as ‘Kulah Daran’ during the Delhi The Sayyids were claimed to descend from the Prophet through his daughter Fatima. They Commanded special respect in Muslim society. Even the Timur protected the life of Sayyids during his invasion in India. Although his policy was one of general slaughter.**

---

### Question 7

In medieval India, the term “Fanam” referred to:

- (a) Clothing
- (b) Coins
- (c) Ornaments
- (d) Weapons
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Socio-Economic Condition of Vijaynagar Empire
Correct answer is Option (b):

The chief gold coin of the Vijayanagar Empire was the varaha or pagoda. The Perta was half a Varaha.
Fanam was one tenth a perta. Tar was a silver coin. Jittal was a copper coin.**

---

### Question 8

The world’s second tallest statue in sitting pose of Ramanuja was inaugurated by the Prime Minister of India at Hyderabad recently. Which one of the following statements correctly represents the teachings of Ramanuja?

- (a) The best means of salvation was devotion.
- (b) Vedas are eternal, self-existent and wholly authoritative.
- (c) Logical arguments were essential means for the highest bliss.
- (d) Salvation was to be obtained through meditation.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Shri Ramanujacharya
Correct answer is Option (a): Shri Ramanujacharya firmly believed that intense devotion to Vishnu was the best means to attain salvation. Sri Ramanujacharya was born in 1017 CE in Tamil Nadu.

He is the most respected Acharya in the philosophy of Sri Vaishnavism. Ramanuja was deeply influenced by the Alvars. He firmly believed that intense devotion to Vishnu was the best means to attain He is famous as the chief proponent of Vishishtadvaita subschool of Vedānta.
He was also referred to as Ilaya Perumal, which means the radiant He wrote nine works that came to be known as the Navratnas including three major commentaries, the Vedartha-Sangraha, the Sribhasya and the Bhagavad Gita-bhashya aimed at providing a philosophical foundation for devotional worship. Vishishtadvaita is a non-dualistic school of Vedanta philosophy in which Brahman alone exists, but is characterized by multiplicity.**

---

---

## Environment Ecology

### Question 1

Which of the following are nitrogen-fixing plants?

Alfalfa
Amaranth
Chickpea
Clover
Purslane (Kulfa)
Spinach

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (b) 1, 3, 5 and 6 only
- (c) 2, 4, 5 and 6 only
- (d) 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Nitrogen fixation
Option (a) is the correct answer: Alfalfa, Chickpea and Clover are nitrogen-fixing plants.
Nitrogen-fixation:

Nitrogen fixation is the process by which nitrogen is taken from its molecular form (N2) in the atmosphere and converted into nitrogen compounds useful for other biochemical processes. Fixation can occur through atmospheric (lightning), industrial, or biological processes.
Nitrogen-Fixing Plants: A N-fixing crop is a natural way to provide plant-adjusted N without any industrial harm to nature.
Nitrogen fixing plants are:

Clovers, vetches, and peas are nitrogen- fixing plants used by farmers worldwide and in the Southern Great Plains of US in particular.
Peas or beans can be used as a summer nitrogen-fixing cover crop or harvested for food. Both ways, they enrich the soil with plant-suitable N. Southern peas prefer warm seasons and are sown when the soil temperature reaches 60F.
Beans: fava (aka faba, broad), alfalfa, green (aka French), runner, field, sweet, peanuts (aka groundnuts), soybeans, cream, black-eyed, or purple-hulled beans, lupins, lentils, cowpeas**

---

### Question 2

Among the following crops, which one is the most important anthropogenic source of both methane and nitrous oxide?

- (a) Cotton
- (b) Rice
- (c) Sugarcane
- (d) Wheat
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Agriculture and Greenhouse gases
Option (b) is the correct answer: Rice is one of the most important anthropogenic sources of both methane and nitrous oxide.
Agriculture and Greenhouse gases:

Methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) are the two most important GHGs after carbon dioxide (CO2)
The most rapid increase in CH4 emission was found in natural wetlands and rice fields due to increased rice cultivation area and climate warming.
N2O emission increased substantially in all the biome types and the largest increase occurred in upland crops due to increasing air temperature and nitrogen fertilizer use.
Rice paddies are considered one of the most important sources of CH4 and N2O emissions, which have attracted considerable attention due to their contribution to global warming.





NOTE: Climate Smart Agriculture and GHG Emissions was very much in news, hence the question. Therefore, it is very important to holistically cover both the static and current affairs for UPSC Pre and Mains.**

---

### Question 3

“System of rice Intensification” of cultivation, in which alternate wetting and drying of rice fields is practised, results in:

Reduced seed requirement
Reduced methane production
Reduced electricity consumption

Select the correct answer using the code given below

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: System of Rice Intensification
Option (d) is the correct answer: All of the given results come from the System of Rice Intensification.
System of Rice Intensification:

The System of Rice Intensification involves cultivating rice with as much organic manure as possible, starting with young seedlings planted singly at wider spacing in a square pattern; and with intermittent irrigation that keeps the soil moist but not inundated, and frequent inter cultivation with weed that actively aerates the soil.
SRI is not a standardised, fixed technological method.
It is rather a set of ideas, a methodology for comprehensively managing and conserving resources by changing the way that land, seeds, water, nutrients, and human labour are used to increase productivity from a small but well-tended number of seed.




Advantages of SRI
In situ Conservation




Higher yields – Both grain and straw
Reduced duration (by 10 days)
Reduced seed requirement
Lesser chemical inputs
Less water requirement
Reduced electricity consumption
Less chaffy grain %
Grain weight increased without change in grain size
Higher head rice recovery
Withstand cyclonic gales
Cold tolerance
Soil health improves through biological activity
Reduced methane production

 
 


Higher labour costs in the initial years
Difficulties in acquiring the necessary skills
Not suitable when no irrigation source available**

---

### Question 4

In the context of WHO Air Quality Guidelines, consider the following statements:

1. The 24-hour mean of PM2.5 should not exceed 15 ug/m3 and annual mean of 5 should not exceed 5 ug/m3.

2. In a year, the highest levels of ozone pollution occur during the period of inclement weather.

3. PM10 can penetrate the lung barrier and enter the bloodstream.

4. Excessive ozone in the air can trigger asthma.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1, 3 and 4
- (b) 1 and 4 only
- (c) 2, 3 and 4
- (d) 1 and 2 only
Explanation


**Ans: b       
Sub-Theme: Air quality
Statement 1 is correct: The 24-hour ceiling mean of PM 2.5 used to be 25 micrograms but has now dropped to 15.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Ozone at ground level is formed by the reaction with sunlight (photochemical reaction) of pollutants such as nitrogen oxides (NOx) from vehicle and industry emissions and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emitted by vehicles, solvents and industry. As a result, the highest levels of ozone pollution occur during periods of sunny weather and not during inclement weather.
Statement 3 is incorrect: PM is a common proxy indicator for air pollution. It affects more people than any other pollutant. While particles with a diameter of 10 microns or less, (≤ PM10) can penetrate and lodge deep inside the lungs, the even more health-damaging particles are those with a diameter of 2.5 microns or less, (≤ PM2.5). PM2.5 can penetrate the lung barrier and enter the blood system.
Statement 4 is correct: Excessive ozone in the air can have a marked effect on human health. It causes breathing problems, triggers asthma, reduces lung function and causes lung diseases. Ozone triggers asthma because it is very irritating to the lungs and airways.**

---

### Question 5

Consider the following:

Carbon monoxide
Nitrogen oxide
Ozone
Sulphur dioxide

Excess of which of the above in the environment is/ are cause(s) of acid rain?

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 2 and 4 only
- (c) 4 only
- (d) 1, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
 Sub-Theme: Air Pollution
Option (b) is the correct answer: Nitrous oxide and Sulphur dioxide cause Acid rain.

Normal rain has a pH of about 5.6 when pH falls below this; it is called Acid rain (pH 4.2 to 4.4).
Acid rain results when Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) & Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) react with water, oxygen & other chemicals to form Sulfuric & Nitric acids.
NOx + SO2 + Moisture + other chemicals

→ Acid Rain (HNO3 + H2SO4)

Effects: Harms microorganisms in the soil; inhibit the activity of nitrogen fixation bacteria; soil acidification; ocean acidification; affects the growth of plants; food chain; kill aquatic animals; corrosion of metals & weathering of stone buildings & statues.

Common Air Pollutants and Their Effects



Pollutant
Sources
Effects


 
 
Particulate matter (PM)
Vehicles, power plants, construction activities, oil
refinery, railway yard, industries, etc.
Cardiovascular diseases, reduces visibility (haze)


Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
Emissions from combustion processes
Can aggravate respiratory diseases, acid rain, Hazy weather


 
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)
Burning of fossil fuels, power plants, metals processing
and smelting facilities, vehicles
Affects respiratory system & functions of the lungs. causes irritation of the eyes, chronic bronchitis, Acid rain


 
 
Ozone (O3)
Results from photochemical reactions b/w NOx & VOCs in presence of sunlight.
Affect the lungs, the respiratory tract, and the eyes, lung cancer



 
NOTE: This particular straightforward question is repeated verbatim from 2013.**

---

### Question 6

Which one of the following has been constituted under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986?

- (a) Central Water Commission
- (b) Central Ground Water Board
- (c) Central Ground Water Authority
- (d) National Water Development Agency
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Environment (Protection) Act, 1986/ Central Ground Water Authority Central Ground Water Authority:



Central Ground Water Authority has been constituted under Section 3 (3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to regulate and control development and management of groundwater resources in the country.
Central Ground Water Authority takes care of regulation and control, management and development of groundwater in the country and issues necessary regulatory directions for the purpose.



Environment (Protection) Act, 1986:

Enacted aftermath of Bhopal Gas Tragedy (1984) for protecting, improving environment & reducing pollution.
Authorises the central government to control & reduce pollution from all sources.
Provides procedures for setting standards of emission or discharge of environmental pollutants.**

---

### Question 7

With reference to Indian laws about wildlife protection, consider the following statements:

Wild animals are the sole property of the government.
When a wild animal is declared protected, such animal is entitled for equal protection whether it is found in protected areas or outside.
Apprehension of a protected wild animal becoming a danger to human life is sufficient ground for its capture or killing.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
 Sub-Theme: Wildlife Protection Important Provisions of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972:
Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, every Wild Animal shall be the property of the State Government, and, where such animal is hunted in a sanctuary or National Park declared by the Central Government, such animal or any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or meat [derived from such animal, or any vehicle, vessel, weapon, trap or tool used in such hunting] shall be the property of the Central Government.
Hunted animals are the sole property of the Government.
Statement 2 is correct: The law governing the subject of wildlife, the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, provides for equal protection for wild animals irrespective of where they are found. It does not discriminate between animals found in protected areas and outside.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Mere apprehension or fear that a wild animal could endanger human life is not a ground for capture or killing. As per Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, only if the wild animal becomes a danger to human life or is deceased or disabled beyond recovery can it be allowed to be captured or killed by the competent authority, the Chief Wildlife Warden of the State.**

---

### Question 8

The “Miyawaki method” is well known for the:

- (a) Promotion of commercial farming in arid and semi-arid areas
- (b) Development of gardens using genetically modified flora
- (c) Creation of mini forests in urban areas
- (d) Harvesting wind energy on coastal areas and on sea surfaces
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Miyawaki Method of Urban Afforestation
Option (c) is the correct answer: Miyawaki method is a method of urban afforestation by turning backyards into mini-forests. It includes planting trees as close as possible in the same area which not only saves space, but the planted saplings also support each other in growth and block sunlight from reaching the ground, thereby preventing the growth of weeds. Thus the saplings become maintenance-free (self- sustainable) after the first three years. It helps to create a forest in just 20 to 30 years while through conventional methods it takes anywhere between 200 to 300 years.
Miyawaki Process

The native trees of the region are identified and divided into four layers — shrub, sub- tree, tree, and canopy.
The quality of soil is analysed and biomass which would help enhance the perforation capacity, water retention capacity, and nutrients in it, is mixed with it.
A mound is built with the soil and the seeds are planted at a very high density — three to five sapling per square meter.
The ground is covered with a thick layer of mulch.**

---

### Question 9

Consider the following pairs:

Wetland/Lake – Location

Hokera Wetland – Punjab
Renuka Wetland – Himachal Pradesh
Rudrasagar Lake – Tripura
Sasthamkotta Lake – Tamil Nadu

How many pairs given above are correctly matched?

- (a) Only one pair
- (b) Only two pairs
- (c) Only three pairs
- (d) All four pairs
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Wetlands
Option (b) is correct:



Wetlands
Location and Significance


Hokera Wetland
Jammu and kashmir.
A perennial natural wetland that is part of the Jhelum basin.


 Renuka Wetland


Himachal Pradesh
A naturally occurring wetland that receives freshwater springs and underground karst formations from the lower Himalayas and the Giri river.




Lake Rudijala/ Rudrasagar Lake


Melaghar, Tripura
A lowland sedimentation reservoir in the northeastern highlands that receives water from three enduring streams that empty into the River Gomti.




 Sasthamkotta


Kollam district, Kerala
Being Kerala’s largest freshwater lake, it has long been a popular destination for travellers.**

---

### Question 10

.

“If rainforests and tropical forests are lungs of the Earth, then surely wetlands function as its kidneys.” Which one of the following functions of wetlands best reflects the above statements?

- (a) The water cycle in wetlands involves surface runoff, subsoil percolation and evaporation.
- (b) Algae form the nutrient base upon which fish, crustaceans, molluscs, birds, reptiles and mammals thrive.
- (c) Wetlands play a vital role in maintaining sedimentation balance and soil stabilisation.
- (d) Aquatic plants absorb heavy metals and excess nutrients.
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Wetland Conservation
Option (d) is the correct answer: Natural wetlands have often been referred to as “earth’s kidneys” because of their high and long-term capacity to filter pollutants from the water that flows through them. Hence, Aquatic plants absorb heavy metals and excess nutrients.
Functions of Kidney and Wetland

Kidneys in our body remove wastes and extra fluid from our body. Our kidneys also remove acid that is produced by the cells of your body and maintain a healthy balance of water, salts, and minerals—such as sodium, calcium, phosphorus, and potassium—in your blood.
In the same manner as sediment, excess nutrients and chemicals flow off of the land, wetlands filter the runoff before it reaches open water. Nutrients are stored and absorbed by plants or Sediment settles at the bottom after reaching an area with slow water flow.**

---

### Question 11

.

With reference to “Gucchi” sometimes mentioned in the news, consider the following statements:

It is a fungus.
It grows in some Himalayan Forest areas.
It is commercially cultivated in the Himalayan foothills of north-eastern India.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 2
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c          
Sub-Theme: Species and their habitat
Option (c) is the correct answer: Guchhi Mushroom is a Species of Fungus cultivated in Himalayan Forests.
Statement 1 is correct: Guchhi mushroom is a species of fungus in the family Morchellaceae of the Ascomycota.
Statement 2 is correct: It is grown in the foothills of Himalayas mostly in the temperate forests of Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, and Jammu and Kashmir.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The mushrooms cannot be cultivated commercially and grow in conifer forests across temperate regions.**

---

### Question 12

Which of the following is not a bird?

- (a) Golden Mahseer
- (b) Indian Nightjar
- (c) Spoonbill
- (d) White Ibis
Explanation


**Ans: a      
Sub-Theme: Freshwater Species
Golden Mahseer (freshwater fish)
Option (a) is the correct answer: Golden Mahseer is also known as the tiger of Indian rivers. It is a species of the genus Tor. The Golden Mahseer, the longest-living freshwater fish, is native to mountain and sub-mountain regions found in the Himalayan Rivers (Indus, Ganga and Brahmaputra). The Pong Dam reservoir, around 250 km from state capital Shimla and 190 km from Chandigarh, supports an ample population of the golden Mahseer. Conservation Status: IUCN: Endangered.**

---

---

## Geography

### Question 1

In the northern hemisphere, the longest day of the year normally occurs in the:

- (a) First half of the month of June
- (b) Second half of the month of June
- (c) First half of the month of July
- (d) Second half of the month of July
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Motion of Earth
Summer Solstice (21st June):

The Northern Hemisphere is tilted towards the sun and the rays of the sun fall directly on the Tropic of Cancer → areas receive more heat.
The longest day and the shortest night at these places occur on 21st June. Thus, the second half of the month of June in the northern hemisphere has the longest day of the year.
Areas near the poles receive less heat as the rays of the sun are slanting.
The North Pole is inclined towards the sun and the places beyond the Arctic Circle experience continuous daylight for about six months.
Since a large portion of the Northern Hemisphere is getting light from the sun, it is summer in the regions north of the equator.
Southern Hemisphere: All these conditions are reversed (winter season- longer nights)




NOTE: This question is a repetition from 2019 only the sentences of both the question and options are twisted to confuse the candidate. Also UPSC has asked questions from similar themes in 2013, please refer to the PYQs for detailed explanation.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements:

1. High clouds primarily reflect solar radiation and cool the surface of the Earth.

2. Low clouds have a high absorption of infrared radiation emanating from the Earth’s surface and thus cause a warming effect.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Clouds
Statement 1 is incorrect: Low, thick clouds primarily reflect solar radiation and cool the surface of the Earth.
Statement 2 is incorrect: High, thin clouds primarily transmit incoming solar radiation. At the same time, they trap some of the outgoing infrared radiation emitted by the Earth and radiate it back downward, thereby warming the surface of the Earth.

Whether a given cloud will heat or cool the surface depends on several factors, including the cloud’s altitude, its size, and the make-up of the particles that form the cloud.
The components of the Earth system that are important to the radiation budget are the planet’s surface, atmosphere, and clouds.**

---

### Question 3

Consider the following States:

Andhra Pradesh
Kerala
Himachal Pradesh
Tripura

How many of the above are generally known as tea- producing States?

- (a) Only one State
- (b) Only two States
- (c) Only three States
- (d) All four States
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Tea production

Black soil is ideal for growing cotton and thus it is also known as black cotton soil.
Formed as a result of the basaltic rocks’ weathering, which first appeared during Cretaceous fissure eruption.
This type of lava flow-derived soil is typical of the northwest Deccan plateau’s Deccan trap (Basalt) region.
Basalt contains titanium-ferromagnetic chemicals, which give basalt its characteristic black colour.

 
Tea Climatic conditions:

Climate: Tropical and Subtropical climate, Warm and moist frost free climate throughout the year with rainfall-1500
Soil: Tea plants require well-drained, fertile soil that is rich in organic matter, The pH of the soil should be slightly acidic, ranging between 4.5 and 5.5,The soil should be able to retain moisture while also allowing excess water to drain away, Tea plants prefer soils with good structure and high porosity to allow oxygen to reach the roots.
Temperature: Less than 15 degree Celsius.
As per the Tea Board under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and Indian Tea Association, Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Kerala and Karnataka are the states known as tea- producing States.**

---

### Question 4

With reference to India, consider the following statements:

Monazite is a source of rare earths.
Monazite contains thorium.
Monazite occurs naturally in the entire Indian coastal sands in India.
In India, government bodies only can process or export monazite.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 1, 2 and 4 only
- (c) 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Rare Earth Metal
Statement 1 and 2 are correct: Rare earth metals are a group of 17 elements. They are lustrous silvery-white soft heavy metals. China accounts for 90% of the world’s rare earth production. In India, monazite is the principal source of rare earths and thorium.
Statement 3 is incorrect: Monazite, though found in most coastal areas of India, is unlikely to be found along the entire coast. The main mines are found along the coasts of southern India in Kerala, Tamil Nadu and in Orissa.
Statement 4 is correct: As per Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules 2004, Indian Rare Earths Limited (IREL), a wholly owned Public Sector Undertaking of the Government of India (GOI) under DAE, is the only entity which has been permitted to produce and process monazite, and handle it for domestic use as well as for export.



NOTE: In the question, in statement 3, the extreme word ‘entire’ is a red flag.**

---

### Question 5

Gandikota canyon of South India was created by which one of the following rivers?

- (a) Cauvery
- (b) Manjira
- (c) Pennar
- (d) Tungabhadra
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Physical features of India



The gorge of Gandikota is situated on the Pennar River in Andhra Pradesh and is known as the Grand Canyon of India.
Gorges are formed when rivers erode through gigantic rock formations over a long period of time.
A gorge is any valley formed by a source of water flowing between tall slabs of steep
Gandikota is a small village in the Kadapa district of Andhra Pradesh.
The swift flowing waters of River Pennar cut through the granite rocks near the village of Gandikota, naturally eroding the rock and forming a deep valley.
The spectacular gorge is famously adjudged as the Grand Canyon of India.**

---

### Question 6

Consider the following pairs:

Peak
Mountains


1. Namcha Barwa
Garhwal Himalaya


2. Nanda Devi
Kumaon Himalaya


3. Nokrek
Sikkim Himalaya

Which of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b        
Sub-Theme: Physical features of India
Pair 1 is incorrect: Namcha Barwa is not situated in Garhwal Himalaya. It is situated in the Eastern Himalaya.
Pair 2 is correct: The part of the Himalayas lying between Satluj and Kali rivers is known as Kumaon Himalayas. Nanda Devi is part of the Kumaon Himalayas, and is located in the state of Uttarakhand, between the Rishi Ganga valley on the west and the Goriganga valley on the east.
Pair 3 is incorrect: Nokrek is situated in West Garo Hills of Meghalaya, not in Sikkim Himalaya.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following pairs:

Reservoirs
States


1. Ghataprabha
Telangana


2. Gandhi Sagar
Madhya Pradesh


3. Indira Sagar
Andhra Pradesh


4. Maithon
Chhattisgarh

How many pairs given above are not correctly matched?

- (a) Only one pair
- (b) Only two pairs
- (c) Only three pairs
- (d) All four pairs
Explanation


**Ans: c          
 Sub-Theme: Reservoir and their location
Pair 1 is incorrect: The Ghataprabha Reservoir is located in the Belagavi district of the state of Karnataka.
Pair 2 is correct: The Gandhi Sagar Dam is one of the four major dams built on India’s Chambal River located in the Mandsaur, districts of the state of Madhya Pradesh.
Pair 3 is incorrect: The Indira Sagar Dam is the largest dam in India, in terms of volume of water stored in the reservoir. It is located on the Narmada River at the town of Narmada Nagar, Punasa in the Khandwa district of Madhya Pradesh in India.
Pair 4 is incorrect: The Maithon Dam is constructed on the Barakar River and it is located at Maithon, 48 km from Dhanbad, in the state of Jharkhand in India.**

---

---

## Indian Economy

### Question 1

With reference to the Indian economy, consider the following statements:

1. If the inflation is too high, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is likely to buy government securities.

2. If the rupee is rapidly depreciating, RBI is likely to sell dollars in the market.

3. If interest rates in the USA or European Union were to fall, that is likely to induce RBI to buy dollars.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Qualitative Tools to control
Statement 1 is incorrect: If the inflation is too high, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is likely to reduce the money supply in the economy to control inflation. Thus, RBI sells the government securities so as to suck the excess money supply from the economy and to control the inflation.
Statement 2 is correct: RBI intervenes in the currency market to support the rupee because if it becomes a weak domestic unit then it can increase a country’s import bill. It can intervene directly in the currency market by buying and selling dollars. If RBI wishes to prop up rupee value, then it can sell dollars and when it needs to bring down rupee value, it can buy dollars.
Statement 3 is correct: When the US raises its domestic interest rates, this tends to make India less attractive for the currency trade. As a result, it pulls some money from the Indian market out and flows back to the US, thereby decreasing the value of India’s currency against the US dollar. Therefore, if interest rates in the USA or EU were to fall, then it is likely to induce RBI to buy dollars.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements:

In India, credit rating agencies are regulated by the Reserve Bank of India.
The rating agency popularly known as ICRA is a public limited company.
Brickwork Ratings is an Indian credit rating agency.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Credit Rating
Statement 1 is incorrect: In India, credit rating agencies are regulated by Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
Statement 2 is correct: ICRA (Investment Information and Credit Rating Agency of India Ltd.) was set up in 1991 by IFCI, LIC, SBI and select banks as well as financial institutions to rate debt instruments.
Statement 3 is correct: In India there are six credit rating agencies registered under Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) namely, CRISIL, ICRA, CARE, SMERA, Fitch India and Brickwork Ratings.
Credit Rating

A credit rating is an assessment of the creditworthiness of a borrower.
Individuals, corporations and governments are assigned credit ratings, whoever wants to borrow money.
Individuals are given ‘credit scores’, while corporations and governments receive ‘credit ratings’.
International credit rating agencies: Fitch Ratings, Moody’s Investors Service and Standard & Poor’s (S&P) are controlling approximately 95% of global ratings
In India: six credit rating agencies registered under Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) namely, CRISIL, ICRA, CARE, SMERA, Fitch India and Brickwork Ratings.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the Banks Board Bureau (BBB)’, which of the following statements are correct?

The Governor of RBI is the Chairman of BBB.
BBB recommends for the selection of heads for Public Sector Banks.
BBB helps the Public Sector Banks in developing strategies and capital raising plans.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Bank Board Bureau
Statement 1 is incorrect: Banks Board Bureau comprises the Chairman, three ex-officio members i.e. Secretary of the Department of Public Enterprises, Secretary of the Department of Financial Services and Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, and five expert members, two of which are from the private sector. The Chairman is selected by the central government and the RBI governor does not head it.
Statement 2 is correct: Banks Board Bureau recommends for the selection of head for Public Sector Banks and other key personnel if required.
Statement 3 is correct: BBB develops strategies for raising capital and improving performance of PSBs.
Banks Board Bureau

The Banks Board Bureau (BBB) has its genesis in the recommendations of ‘The Committee to Review Governance of Boards of Banks in India, May 2014 (Chairman J. Nayak)’.
It was part of the Indradhanush
It will make recommendations for appointment of whole-time directors as well as non-executive chairpersons of Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and state owned financial institutions.
The Ministry of Finance takes the final decision on the appointments in consultation with the Prime Minister’s Office.
Composition: Banks Board Bureau comprises the Chairman, three ex-officio members i.e. Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises, Secretary of the Department of Financial Services and Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, and five expert members, two of which are from the private
The Chairman is selected by the central governmnet.**

---

### Question 4

In India, which one of the following is responsible for maintaining price stability by controlling inflation?

- (a) Department of Consumer Affairs
- (b) Expenditure Management Commission
- (c) Financial Stability and Development Council
- (d) Reserve Bank of India
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Monetary Policy
Option (d) is correct: In India, the responsibility for maintaining price stability and controlling inflation lies with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The RBI is the central bank of India and is responsible for regulating the supply of money in the economy through various monetary policy measures such as adjusting interest rates, controlling the reserve ratios of banks, and buying or selling government securities in the open market.
MONETARY POLICY

It is the policy under which RBI uses monetary instruments (interest rate and other instruments) under the RBI Act, 1934, to influence money supply in the economy to achieve certain macroeconomic goals.
Various instruments of Monetary Policy: Repo rate; Reverse Repo Rate; CRR; SLR; LAF; MSF; Bank Rate; MSS; etc.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to the expenditure made by an organization or a company, which of the following statements is/are correct?

Acquiring new technology is capital expenditures.
Debt financing is considered capital expenditure, while equity financing is considered revenue expenditures.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Expenditure
Statement 1 is correct: When a company funds are used to acquire, upgrade, and maintain physical assets such as property, plants, buildings, technology, or equipment are known as Capital Expenditure (CapEx) of a Company.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Equity financing is the process of raising capital through the sale of shares. It is an example of non-debt capital receipts.
Capital Expenditure (CapEx) of a Company:

When a company funds are used to acquire, upgrade, and maintain physical assets such as property, plants, buildings, technology, or equipment are known as Capital Expenditure (CapEx) of a Company.
When a company borrows money to be paid back at a future date with interest it is known as debt financing. Example: Repayment of loan is an example of capital

Equity financing:

Equity financing is the process of raising capital through the sale of shares. It is an example of non-debt capital receipts.
Capital receipts are receipts that create liabilities or reduce financial They also refer to incoming cash flows. Example: Recovery of loans and advances, disinvestment, issue of bonus shares, etc.**

---

### Question 6

With reference to Indian economy, consider the following statements:

A share of the household financial savings goes towards government borrowings.
Dated securities issued at market related rates in auctions form a large component of internal debt.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Basic Concept of Economy
Statement 1 is correct: The household financial savings used in part to finance government borrowing.  Governmental  securities,  often known as G-secs and Treasury Bills, are issued as a means of borrowing.
Statement 2 is correct: Over 93% of the total state debt is made up of internal debt. Internal loans, which account for the majority of the public debt, are further separated into marketable and non-marketable debt.**

---

### Question 7

“Rapid Financing Instrument” and “Rapid Credit Facility” are related to the provisions of lending by which one of the following?

- (a) Asian Development Bank
- (b) International Monetary Fund
- (c) United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative
- (d) World Bank
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Financial Assistance
Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) and Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) is an arm of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which provides financial assistance to the countries in need,

Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI)

The Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) provides rapid financial assistance, which is available to all member countries facing an urgent balance of payment needs.
The RFI was created as part of a broader reform to make the IMF’s financial support more flexible to address the diverse needs of member countries.
The RFI replaced the IMF’s previous emergency assistance policy and can be used in a wide range of circumstances.


Rapid Credit Facility (RCF)

The Rapid Credit Facility (RCF) provides rapid concessional financial assistance to low-income countries (LICs) facing an urgent Balance of Payments (BoP) need with no ex-post conditionality where a full-fledged economic program is neither necessary nor feasible.
The RCF was created under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) as part of a broader reform to make the Fund’s financial support more flexible and better tailored to the diverse needs of LICs, including in times of crisis.







NOTE: This was in the news due to Sri Lanka’s recent crisis and political instability. Therefore, it is very important to holistically cover the static portion and keep track of various national and international events w.r.t. UPSC syllabus.**

---

### Question 8

With reference to the Indian economy, consider the following statements:

An increase in Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER) indicates the appreciation of rupee.
An increase in the Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) indicates an improvement in trade
An increasing trend in domestic inflation relative to inflation in other countries is likely to cause an increasing divergence between NEER and REER.

Which of the statements are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Exchange Rate
Statement 1 is correct: NEER is the Weighted average of bilateral nominal exchange rates of the home currency in terms of foreign currencies. The nominal exchange rate is the amount of domestic currency needed to purchase foreign currency. Therefore, an increase/decrease in NEER indicates the appreciation/depreciation of Rupee against the weighted basket of currencies of its trading partners.
Statement 2 is incorrect: REER is the weighted average of nominal exchange rates adjusted for relative price differential between the domestic and foreign countries. Therefore, an increase in a nation’s REER is an indication that its exports are becoming more expensive and its imports are becoming cheaper, which simply means it is losing trade competitiveness.
Statement 3 is correct: A real effective exchange rate (REER) is the NEER adjusted by relative prices or costs, typically captured in inflation differentials between the home economy and trading partners. Higher the inflation higher will be divergence (difference between) NEER and REER.**

---

### Question 9

Consider the following statements:

Tight monetary policy of the US Federal Reserve could lead to capital flight.
Capital flight may increase the interest cost of firms with existing External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs).
Devaluation of domestic currency decreases the currency risk associated with ECBs.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Monetary Policy and External Commercial Borrowings
Statement 1 is correct: A tight monetary policy is implemented to contract economic growth. It involves increasing interest rates to constrain borrowing and to stimulate savings, this can discourage investment and depress asset prices. It makes borrowing less attractive as interest payment increases. Thus, tight monetary policy of the US Federal Reserve could lead to capital flight by the investors.
Statement 2 is correct: Capital flight can drive up the interest costs as there is reduced money supply in the system. Thus, it would lead to increase in the interest cost of firms that have external commercial borrowings.
Statement 3 is incorrect: ECB is basically a loan availed by an Indian entity from a non-resident lender in foreign currency whereas Devaluation is decreasing the value of currency within a fixed exchange rate system. Therefore, devaluation of the domestic currency would increase the currency risks associated with ECBs and will result in higher interest cost for borrowers.




NOTE: This is basically a conceptual based question by clubbing both the Monetary Policy and External Sector. Therefore, it underlines the importance of conceptual clarity of various economic tools, instruments, etc.**

---

### Question 10

With reference to the Indian economy, what are the advantages of “Inflation-Indexed Bonds (IIBs)”?

Government can reduce the coupon rates on its borrowing by way of IIBs.
IIBs provide protection to the investors from uncertainty regarding inflation.
The interest received as well as capital gains on IIBs are not taxable.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Bonds and Securities
Statements 1 and 2 are correct: Inflation- Indexed Bonds is a debt market securities offered by the government to protect the savings from inflation and offer positive real rates of returns. The principal and interest are linked to WPI/ CPI. Inflation indexed bonds provide returns that are always in excess of inflation, ensuring that price rise does not erode the value of savings. Globally, IIBs were first issued in 1981 in the UK. In India, the Government of India through RBI issued IIBs (linked to WPI) in June 2013. They can be traded in the secondary market like other G-Secs and help the Government to reduce the coupon rates on its borrowings.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The existing tax provisions will be applicable on interest payment and capital gains on IIBs. There will be no special tax treatment for these bonds.**

---

### Question 11

Which of the following activities constitute a real sector in the economy?

Farmers harvesting their crops
Textile mills converting raw cotton into fabrics
A commercial bank lending money to a trading company
A corporate body issuing Rupee Denominated Bonds overseas.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: a          
Sub-Theme: Sectors of Economy
The real sector of an economy is the key section as activities of this sector persuade economic output and is represented by those economic segments that are essential for the progress of GDP of the economy.
Statements 1 and 2 are correct: The sector’s (Farming and Textile Mills) ability to produce enough goods and services to satisfy global demand makes it essential for the economy’s long-term viability.
Statements 3 and 4 are incorrect: The financial sector is an area of the economy that consists of businesses and institutions that offer financial services to wholesale and retail clients. A commercial bank lending money to a trading company or a corporate body issuing rupee denominated bonds overseas constitute financial sector activities and not real sector activities.**

---

### Question 12

With reference to Convertible Bonds, consider the following statements:

As there is an option to exchange the bond for equity, Convertible Bonds pay a lower rate of interest.
The option to convert to equity affords the bondholder a degree of indexation to rising consumer prices.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: c         
Sub-Theme: Convertible Bond
Statement 1 is correct: A convertible bond is a fixed-income corporate debt security that yields interest payments but can be converted into a predetermined number of common stock or equity shares. Convertible bonds generally offer a lower coupon rate or rate of return in exchange for the value of the option to convert the bond into common stock. Investors will generally accept a lower coupon rate on a convertible bond, compared with the coupon rate on an otherwise identical regular bond, because of its conversion feature.
Statement 2 is correct: The option to convert to equity affords the bondholder a degree of indexation to rising consumer prices as equity prices can differ widely from the given interest and the difference in that can be used as a hedge for inflation.**

---

---

## Indian Polity

### Question 1

In the Government of India Act 1919, the functions of Provincial Government were divided into “Reserved” and “Transferred” subjects. Which of the following were treated as “Reserved” subjects?

1. Administration of Justice

2. Local Self-Government

3. Land Revenue

4. Police

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 2 and 3
- (b) 2, 3 and 4
- (c) 1, 3 and 4
- (d)1, 2 and 4
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Acts and Regulations under the Crown Rule (1858–1947)
The Government of India Act 1919, also known as Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms came into force in 1921 with the sole purpose to ensure Indians of their representation in the Government. The Act divided the provincial subjects into two parts – transferred and reserved, this dual scheme of governance was known as ‘dyarchy’.
Options 1, 3 and 4 are “Reserved Subjects”: The reserved list includes subjects such as Law and Order, Finance, Land Revenue, Administration of Justice, Police, irrigation etc. and the subjects were to be administered by the governor through his executive council of bureaucrats. All-important subjects were kept in the reserved subjects of the Provincial Executive.
Option 2 is “Transferred Subjects”: The transferred subjects were to be administered by ministers nominated from among the elected members of the legislative council and it included subjects such as education, health, Local Self-Government, industry, agriculture, excise, etc.
Other Important Provisions of Government of India Act (Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms) Act, 1919:

Relaxed the central control over the provinces by demarcating and separating the central and provincial subjects.
Introduced Bicameralism and Direct Elections in the country.
It required 3 out of 6 members in the

Viceroy’s Executive Council to be Indian.

It extended the principle of communal representation among the Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and 
Establishment of a Public Service 
Separated the provincial budgets from the Central budget.




NOTE: Earlier question came on ‘Dyarchy’ in 2017 and in every alternate year, in one way or another there is question on acts and policies of colonial times**

---

### Question 2

If a particular area is brought under the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India, which one of the following statements best reflects the consequence of it?

- (a) This would prevent the transfer of land of tribal people to non-tribal people.
- (b) This would create a local self-governing body in that area.
- (c) This would convert that area into the Union
- (d) The State having such areas would be declared a Special Category State.
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Scheduled and Tribal Areas/Articles and Schedules of Indian Constitution
Fifth Schedule:

The Fifth Schedule of the Constitution deals with the provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes. Article 244 (1) of the Constitution defines Scheduled Areas as the areas defined so by the President of India and are mentioned in the 5th schedule of the Constitution.
Governors can make regulations for peace & good government of Scheduled Areas after consulting the Tribal Advisory Council (TAC).
Such regulations may prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members of the scheduled tribes, regulate the allotment of land to members of the scheduled tribes and regulate the business of moneylending in relation to the scheduled tribes.
The provisions regarding the administration and control of Scheduled and Tribal Areas of any state except the four states are mentioned under this schedule: Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram.




NOTE: Earlier questions on ‘Fifth Schedule’ came in 2015 and 2019. Therefore, it is advisable to prepare the theme and sub-theme very holistically.**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the writs issued by the Courts in India, consider the following statements:

1. Mandamus will not lie against a private organisation unless it is entrusted with a public duty.

2. Mandamus will not lie against a Company even though it may be a Government Company.

3. Any public minded person can be a petitioner to move the Court to obtain the writ of Quo Warranto.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Writ Type and Scope

Statement 1 is correct: The word Mandamus means “we command”. It directs activity and commands issued by the court to public officials asking them to perform. It is issued against any public body, corporation, inferior court, tribunal, or government for the same purpose. Mandamus cannot be issued against a private individual or body.
Statement 2 is correct: Mandamus won’t be granted against private individuals and companies that have no public duty to perform. It cannot be issued against a legislature, commanding or preventing it to enact legislation.
Statement 3 is correct: The meaning of the word Quo Warranto is “By what authority or warrant”. Quo Warranto is issued by the court to inquire into the legality of the claim of a person to a public office. Unlike the other writs, this can be sought by any interested person and not necessarily by the aggrieved person.**

---

### Question 4

Consider the following statements:

1. A bill amending the Constitution requires a prior recommendation of the President of India.

2. When a Constitution Amendment Bill is presented to the President of India, it is obligatory for the President of India to give his/her assent.

3. A Constitution Amendment Bill must be passed by both the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha by a special majority and there is no provision for joint sitting.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: (b)
 Sub-Theme: Procedure for the Amendment 
Statement 1 is incorrect: Prior permission of the President is not required to introduce the bill amending the Constitution in India.
Statement 2 is correct: The 24th constitutional amendment made it obligatory for the President to give his assent, when a Constitution Amendment Bill was presented to him.
Statement 3 is correct: Article 368 of the Indian constitution requires that the constitution of India can be amended by both houses of parliament by a 2/3 majority (special majority). In case of disagreement between both houses, there is no provision to summon a joint session of parliament.
Procedure for the Amendment (Article 368):



Borrowed from
Constitution of South Africa


Introduction of bills
Amendment bill can be introduced only in either house of Parliament


Who can introduce?
Either by a minister or private member.


President’s role in introduction of bill
Prior permission of the President is not required to introduce the bill.


Type of Majority needed
Special Majority: Majority of the total membership of that house (50%) + by a majority of not less than 2/3 of the members of that house present and voting (2/3 of Present and Voting).






Bill in houses
Both the houses need to pass the bill with special majority


 Joint seating (Art. 108)
There is no provision for a joint sitting in case of disagreement between the two Houses.


Amending federal provisions
Special majority + ratification by the legislatures of half of the states by a simple majority.


Role of President in assenting the bill
24th constitutional amendment: It also amended Article 368 to provide expressly that Parliament has power to amend any provision of the Constitution.
The amendment further made it obligatory for the President to give his
assent, when a Constitution Amendment Bill was presented to him.


Role of state legislature in introducing bill
State       legislature       cannot introduce such a bill.



 



NOTE: Earlier in 2013 a question on such a basic concept of Constitutional Amendment came from M. Laxmikanth. Therefore, it is advisable to read M. Laxmikanth very minutely and analyse the PYQs.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha, consider the following statements:

1. As per the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the election of Deputy Speaker shall be held on such date as the Speaker may fix.

2. There is a mandatory provision that the election of a candidate as Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha shall be from either the principal opposition party or the ruling party.

3. The Deputy Speaker has the same powers as of the Speaker when presiding over the sitting of the House and no appeal lies against his rulings.

4. The well-established parliamentary practice regarding the appointment of Deputy Speaker is that the motion is moved by the Speaker and duty seconded by the Prime Minister.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 1, 2 and 3
- (c) 3 and 4 only
- (d) 2 and 4 only
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: People’s Representative/Speaker and Deputy Speaker
Statement 1 is correct: The date of election of the Deputy Speaker is fixed by the Speaker. While on the other hand the date of election of the Speaker is fixed by the President.
Statement 2 is incorrect: There is no such mandatory provision that the election of a candidate, as Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha, shall be from either the principal opposition party or the ruling party. It is only by convention that the position of Deputy Speaker is offered to the opposition party in India.
Statement 3 is correct: In case of the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker presides over the sessions of the Lok Sabha and conducts the business in the house, during such time he/she enjoys the same power as the Speaker when presiding over the sitting of the House. Statement 4 is incorrect: Regarding the appointment of Deputy Speaker, there is no such parliamentary practice of moving motion by Speaker and duty seconded by the Prime Minister.



NOTE: Be attentive while attempting this type of question here in statement 2 and 4 you can see the use of extreme words such as ‘mandatory’ and over emphasising words such as ‘well established’, so it is a red flag, not all time but most of the time such types of statements are generally wrong. Before marking, at least think and then mark the answer, otherwise you may lose 2 marks in haste!!**

---

### Question 6

Which of the following is/are the exclusive power(s) of Lok Sabha?

1. To ratify the declaration of Emergency

2. To pass a motion of no-confidence against the Council of Ministers.

3. To impeach the President of India

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Exclusive powers of LS &RS 

Statement 1 is incorrect: The proclamation of Emergency must be approved by both the Houses of Parliament within one month from the date of its issue. If approved by both the Houses  of  Parliament,  the  emergency continues for six months, and can be extended to an indefinite period with an approval of the Parliament for every six months.
Statement 2 is correct: No confidence Motion can only be initiated and passed in LS. 
Statement 3 is incorrect: As per Article 61, when a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charges can be initiated by either House of Parliament. The impeachment resolution needs to be passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total membership in each house.**

---

### Question 7

Consider the following statements:

1. The Constitution of India classifies the ministers into four ranks Cabinet Minister, Minister of State with Independent Charge, Minister of State and Deputy Minister.

2. The total number of ministers in the Union Government, including the Prime Minister, shall not exceed 15 percent of the total number of members in the Lok Sabha.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Council of Ministers
Statement 1 is incorrect: The constitution mentions the word ‘council of ministers’, however it doesn’t classify ministers into 4 categories. Generally, the Prime Minister and other Ministers are collectively known as the Council of Ministers.
Statement 2 is correct: As per 91st CAA, the total number of Central Council of Ministers/ State Council of Ministers including Prime Minister/Chief Minister should not be more than 15% of total strength of Lok Sabha. It stated that the number of ministers in the state legislature, including the CM, in a state shall not be less than 12. A member who is disqualified on the ground of defection shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a minister.**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following statements:

1. Pursuant to the report of N. Sanyal Committee, the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 was passed.

2. The Constitution of India empowers the Supreme Court and the High Court to punish for contempt of themselves.

3. The Constitution of India defines Civil Contempt and Criminal Contempt.

4. In India, the Parliament is vested with the powers to make laws on Contempt of Court.

Which of the above statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 1, 2 and 4
- (c) 3 and 4 only
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Contempt of Court

Statement 1 is correct: Pursuant to the recommendations made by the H N Sanyal Committee, the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 was passed to bring transparency and more clarity in the concept of contempt of court.
Statement 2 is correct: The Supreme Court and the High Courts of India have been empowered with the power to penalise Contempt of Court under Articles 129 and 215 of the Constitution of India.
Statement 3 is incorrect: The Constitution of India does not define Civil Contempt and/or Criminal Contempt. However, the expression has been defined by the Contempt of Court Act of 1971.
Statement 4 is correct: Article 142 (2) of the Indian Constitution states that “subject to the provisions of any law made on this behalf by Parliament” the Supreme Court shall have all and every power to make any order on the punishment of any contempt of itself.




NOTE: Even if you don’t have any idea about the H N Sanyal Committee, you can still reach the answer by deducing the other with your knowledge, which is possible if you have thoroughly read M. Laxmikanth. In Laxmikanth it is clearly mentioned that the Constitution of India does not define Civil Contempt and/or Criminal Contempt. However, the expression has been defined by the Contempt of Court Act of 1971.
Now if you eliminate statement 3 you’ll be left with two options i.e. (a) and (b). Now you know that statement 4 is correct as per Article 142(2), hence it has to be option (b) 1, 2 and 4.**

---

### Question 9

With reference to India, consider the following statements:

1. Government law officers and legal firms are recognised as advocates, but corporate lawyers and patent attorneys are excluded from recognition as advocates.

2. Bar Councils have the power to lay down the rules relating to legal education and recognition of law colleges.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Functions of Judiciary

Statement 1 is incorrect: As per the Advocates Act, 1961 Advocates to be the only recognized class of persons entitled to practice law. Corporate Lawyers, as well as patent attorneys, are too recognized as advocates and there’s no prohibition on their recognition as advocates. 
Statement 2  is  correct: To  recognize universities that offer a law degree as a prerequisite for becoming an advocate and inspect and visit universities, or to direct the State Bar Councils to do so are one of the functions of BCI.**

---

### Question 10

Consider the following statements:

1. Attorney General of India and Solicitor General of India are the only officers of the Government who are allowed to participate in the meetings of the Parliament of India.

2. According to the Constitution of India, the Attorney General of India submits his resignation when the Government which appointed him

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: d 
 Sub-Theme: Attorney General

Statement 1 is incorrect: Attorney General has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of Parliament or their joint sitting and any committee of the Parliament of which he is a member, but without a right to vote. He enjoys all the privileges and immunities that are available to a Member of Parliament. While Solicitor General of India and Additional Solicitor General of India have no such rights or privilege.
Statement 2 is incorrect: The term of office of the AG is not fixed by the Constitution and also, the Constitution does not contain the procedure and grounds for his removal. He holds office during the pleasure of the president and conventionally, he resigns when CoM resigns or is replaced, as he is appointed on its advice.**

---

### Question 11

With reference to anti-defection law in India, consider the following statements:

1. The law specifies that a nominated legislator cannot join any political party within six months of being appointed to the House.

2. The law does not provide any timeframe within which the presiding officer has to decide a defection case.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Provisions of the Anti-Defection Law

Statement 1 is incorrect: A nominated member of a House becomes disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat in the House. This means that he may join any political party within six months of taking his seat in the House.
Statement 2 is correct: The law does not specify any time period for the Presiding Officer to decide on a disqualification plea under the Tenth Schedule.**

---

---

## Modern History

### Question 1

With reference to Indian history, consider the following statements:

The Dutch established their factories/warehouses on the east coast on lands granted to them by Gajapati rulers.
Alfonso de Albuquerque captured Goa from the Bijapur Sultanate.
The English East India Company established a factory at Madras on a plot of land leased from a representative of the Vijayanagara empire.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Various events during the advent of the Europeans

Statement 1 is incorrect: There is a difference in timeline of the events. The end of Gajapati Dynasty was in 1542 and the United East India Company of the Netherlands, formed in March 1605 by the Charter of Dutch Parliament and founded their first factory in Masulipatnam in Andhra in 1605.
Statement 2 is correct: Alfonso de Albuquerque considered as Founder of the Portuguese power in India: captured Goa from Bijapur; persecuted Muslims; captured Bhatkal from Sri Krishna Deva Rai (1510) of Vijayanagara.
Statement 3 is correct: The English East India Company established a factory in Madras in 1639 on land leased from representatives of Vijayanagara Empire called the Nayakas**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following freedom fighters:

Barindra Kumar Ghosh
Jogesh Chandra Chatterjee
Rash Behari Bose

Who of the above was/were actively associated with the Ghadar Party?

- (a) 1 and 2
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 3 only
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Revolutionary Activities Abroad
Ghadar Party, 1913:

Ghadar Party was a revolutionary group organised around a weekly newspaper “The Ghadar” with its headquarters at San Francisco and branches along the US coast and in the Far East.
These revolutionaries included mainly ex-soldiers and peasants who had migrated from the Punjab to the USA and Canada in search of better employment
Pre-Ghadar revolutionary activity had been carried on by Ramdas Puri, G.D. Kumar, Taraknath Das, Sohan Singh Bhakna and Lala Hardayal who reached there in 1911.
To carry out revolutionary activities, the earlier activists had set up a ‘Swadesh Sevak Home’ at Vancouver and ‘United India House’ at Finally, in 1913, the Ghadar was established, with the aim of organising assassinations of officials, publishing revolutionary and anti- imperialist literature, work among Indian troops stationed abroad, procure arms and bring about a simultaneous revolt in all British colonies.
The moving spirits behind the Ghadar Party were Lala Hardayal, Ramchandra, Bhagwan Singh, Kartar Singh Saraba, Barkatullah and Bhai Other prominent leaders involved in the movement: Kartar Singh Saraba, Raghubar Dayal Gupta, Rash Behari Bose, and Sachin Sanyal.

Additional Information:

Barindra Kumar Ghosh was associated with a revolutionary group called Jugantar and Jogesh Chatterjee was associated with the Hindustan Republican Association/Army (HRA).**

---

### Question 3

With reference to the proposals of Cripps Mission, consider the following statements:

The Constituent Assembly would have members nominated by the Provincial Assemblies as well as the Princely States.

2. Any Province, which is not prepared to accept the new Constitution would have the right to sign a separate agreement with Britain regarding its future status.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Cripps Mission
Cripps Mission (1942):

In March 1942, a mission headed by Stafford Cripps was sent to India with constitutional proposals to seek Indian support for World War Because of the reverses suffered by Britain in South-East Asia, the Japanese threat to invade India seemed real now and Indian support became crucial.
There was pressure on Britain from the Allies (USA, USSR, and China) to seek Indian

Provisions:

Indian union with a Dominion status would be set up and it would be free to decide its relation with the UN and the Commonwealth.
After the war the Constituent Assembly would be formed with members from Provinces (elected through proportional representation) and Princely states (nominated). (Hence, statement 1 is )
Conditions of Accepting New Constitution:

Any Province not willing to join the Union can have a separate Constitution and form a Separate union. (Hence, statement 2 is correct.)
New Constitution making Body and the Government would negotiate a treaty for Transfer of Power.**

---

---

## Science Technology

### Question 1

“Biorock technology” is talked about in which one of the following situations?

- (a) Restoration of damaged coral reefs
- (b) Development of building materials using plant residues
- (c) Identification of areas for exploration/extraction of shale gas
- (d) Providing salt licks for wild animals in forests/protected areas
Explanation


**Ans: a
Sub-Theme: Coral Reef restoration
Option (a) is correct: Recently, The Zoological Survey of India (ZSI), with help from Gujarat’s forest department, is attempting for the first time a process to restore coral reefs using biorock or mineral accretion technology in the Gulf of Kachchh.

Biorock is the term used to describe the material created by the electro- accumulation of minerals dissolved in saltwater on steel structures that are lowered onto the seafloor and connected to an energy source, in this case solar panels that float on the surface.**

---

### Question 2

Consider the following statements :

DNA Barcoding can be a tool to:

assess the age of a plant or animal.
distinguish among species that look alike.
identify undesirable animal or plant materials in processed foods.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 2
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d 
Sub-Theme: DNA
Statement 1 is incorrect: Scientists use a radioactive carbon isotope called carbon-14 as their clock to determine the age of plant and animal remains from the more recent past. DNA barcoding is a taxonomic technique that identifies an organism as belonging to a specific species by using a short genetic marker in its DNA. An individual DNA sequence is compared to a reference library of similar DNA sections to accomplish this (called sequences). Statement 2 is correct: DNA Barcoding helps in the identification of species even from minute amounts of tissue which can help tackle problems like illegal trade of endangered species. DNA barcodes can effectively control pest attack, identifying disease vectors properly.
Statement 3 is correct: Using DNA barcoding, which is widely used in fish species, is a viable method for authenticating the processed food. Using DNA barcoding, natural resource managers can monitor illegal trade of products made of natural resources like hardwood trees. DNA barcoding can be used to identify the important medicinal plant.**

---

### Question 3

Consider the following statements in respect of probiotics:

Probiotics are made of both bacteria and yeast.
The organisms in probiotics are found in food we ingest but they do not naturally occur in our gut.
Probiotics help in the digestion of milk sugars.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 3
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: c
Statement 1 is correct: Probiotics are live bacteria and yeasts that are believed to be helpful in preventing a number of diseases. They are also referred to as “good bacteria” and are typically eaten as supplements or in yogurt, also found in other fermented foods
Statement 2 is incorrect: Some bacteria aid in food digestion, eliminate disease-causing cells, or create vitamins. Numerous probiotic product bacteria are identical to or closely related to those found in human bodies naturally.
Statement 3 is correct: A well-known food source of probiotics is yoghurt. The enzyme ß-D-galactosidase is present in some strains of bacteria in yoghurt, aids in the breakdown of lactose in dairy products into the sugars glucose and galactose. Thus it also helps in the digestion of milk sugars.**

---

### Question 4

Which one of the following statements best describes the role of B cells and T cells in the human body?

- (a) They protect the body from environmental allergens.
- (b) They alleviate the body’s pain and inflammation.
- (c) They act as immune suppressants in the body.
- (d) They protect the body from the diseases caused by pathogens.
Explanation


**Ans: d 
Sub-Theme: Basic Science
Option (d) is correct: Lymphocytes are primarily classified into B cells and T cells. B cells function by producing antibodies that are released into the body’s fluids, which then attack antigens present in the bloodstream.

Acquired immunity is pathogen specific, it is characterized by memory.
This means when our body encounters a pathogen for the first time it produces a response called primary response which is of low intensity.
Subsequent encounters with the same pathogen elicits a highly intensified secondary or anamnestic response.
This type of immune responses are carried out with the help of two special types of lymphocytes present in our blood, i.e B-lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes.
The B-lymphocytes produce an army of proteins in response to pathogens into our blood to fight with them.
These proteins are called antibodies.**

---

### Question 5

With reference to “Software as a Service (SaaS)”, consider the following statements:

SaaS buyers can customise the user interface and can change data fields.
SaaS users can access their data through their mobile devices.
Outlook, Hotmail and Yahoo Mail are form of SaaS

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Information Technology
Software as a Service (SaaS)

Software as a Service means software which is offered by a third party as a service, which means that hosting and maintenance are taken care of by the third
Previously if an organisation wanted to use a software, it had to be deployed on local systems and then maintained appropriately for usage. But in SAAS, software can be directly accessed typically using thin clients like browsers.
Customers can adjust the user interface (UI) to alter the program’s appearance and feel as well as particular components, like data fields, to change the data that is
SaaS enables online programme access for any user. The user is not required to install the programme on their computer. Users can therefore access data via their mobile
SaaS enables users to access the software from several places via a web With remote desktop software, he or she may work from home.
SaaS includes services like Outlook, Hotmail, and Yahoo Mail.

Statement 1 is correct: Web-based software is adaptable enough to be customised for both particular corporate needs and individual users. Customers can adjust the user interface (UI) to alter the program’s appearance and feel as well as particular components, like data fields, to change the data that is displayed.
Statement 2 is correct: SaaS enables online programme access for any user. The user is not required to install the programme on their computer. Users can therefore access data via their mobile devices.
Statement 3 is correct: SaaS includes services like Outlook, Hotmail, and Yahoo Mail. In order to utilise these services, a user must log into their account online, frequently using a computer browser.**

---

### Question 6

.

With reference to Web 3.0, consider the following statements:

Web 3.0 technology enables people to control their own data.
In Web 3.0 world, there can be blockchain based social networks.
Web 3.0 is operated by users collectively rather than a corporation.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Web 3.0 Technology
Web3

In a Web3 world, people control their own data and bounce around from social media to email to shopping using a single personalised account, creating a public record on the block chain of all of that
Web 3.0 will be permissionless and democratic. Thus people can maintain blockchain based social networks in Web 3.0.
Web 3.0 is a decentralized internet to be run on blockchain technology.

World Wide Web

World Wide Web, also known as a Web, is a collection of websites or web pages stored in web servers and connected to local computers through the internet.
These websites contain text pages, digital images, audios, videos, Users can access the content of these sites from any part of the world over the internet using their devices such as computers, laptops, cell phones, etc.

Statement 1 is correct: In a Web3 world, people control their own data.
Statement 2 is correct: Web 3.0 will be permissionless and democratic. Thus people can maintain blockchain based social networks in Web 3.0.
Statement 3 is correct: In Web 3.0 all the value that’s created can be shared amongst more people, rather than just the owners, investors and employees. Thus it is operated by users collectively rather than by corporations.**

---

### Question 7

Which one of the following is the context in which the term “qubit” is mentioned?

- (a) Cloud Services
- (b) Quantum Computing
- (c) Visible Light Communication Technologies
- (d) Wireless Communication Technologies
Explanation


**Ans: b
Sub-Theme: Quantum Computing
The Correct answer is Option (b): Quantum computers use quantum bits or Qubits, which can be both 0 and 1 at the same time. Quantum Computing

Quantum computers are machines that use the properties of quantum physics to store data and perform computations.
A classical computer performs operations using classical bits, which can be either 0 or 1.
Quantum computer uses quantum bits or Qubits, which can be both 0 and 1 at the same time.

Qubits (or quantum bits) are the units of computation in quantum computers. They take advantage of quantum mechanics characteristics, which regulate how matter behaves at the atomic level.



The laws of quantum physics are used to achieve functioning of quantum computing:

Superimposition: Each quantum bit (basic unit of information in a quantum computer) can represent both a 1 and a 0 at the same time, which is known as
Quantum entanglement: Subatomic particles become “entangled” (connected) in quantum entanglement, which means that any change in one upsets the other, even though they are at opposite ends of the universe.


Major advantages: Faster, Accurate, & Energy efficient.

Sycamore: it is Google’s Quantum Computer, which recently claimed Quantum Supremacy.
Quantum Supremacy: refers to quantum computers being able to solve a problem that a classical computer**

---

### Question 8

Consider the following communication technologies:

Closed-circuit Television
Radio Frequency Identification
Wireless Local Area Network

Which of the above are considered Short-Range devices/technologies?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Short Range Devices
The Correct answer is Option (d): All the given technologies are Short Range Technologies.
Short Range Device/Technologies

The term “short-range radio device” refers to radio transmitters that offer either unidirectional or bidirectional communication and have a low potential to interfere with other radio 
Such devices are allowed to operate without hindrance and without being protected.

The term “Short Range Device” refers to a wide range of wireless devices, such as different types of:

Access control (including door and gate openers)
Alarms and movement detectors
Closed-circuit television (CCTV)
Cordless audio devices, including wireless microphones
Industrial control
Local Area Networks
Medical implants
Metering devices
Remote control
Radio frequency identification (RFID)
Road Transport Telematics




NOTE: Recently, Google Pay has launched a new feature in India, ‘Tap to pay for UPI’, in collaboration with Pine Labs. The feature makes use of Near Field Communication (NFC) technology, which is a short-range wireless connectivity technology.**

---

### Question 9

Consider the following statements:

Other than those made by humans, nanoparticles do not exist in nature.
Nanoparticles of some metallic oxides are used in the manufacture of some cosmetics.
Nanoparticles of some commercial products which enter the environment are unsafe for

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

- (a) 1 only
- (b) 3 only
- (c) 1 and 2 only
- (d) 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles

Particles with particle size less than 100 nm are called nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are particles with dimensions comparable to 1/109 of a metre.
Types of nanoparticles:
Carbon Based: It includes Graphene and other carbon based products.
Metal based: The main component of these nanomaterials are metals. They include Nano silver and metal oxides.
Natural NPs: sourced from forest fires, volcanic eruptions, weathering, dust storms etc. Eg: iron oxides/sulfides, silver, and
Anthropogenic NPs: unknowingly or purposely released in the environment during various industrial and mechanical
Cosmetics: In order to provide an adequate level of sun protection, titanium dioxide and zinc oxide are frequently added to cosmetics among the metal and metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) that may be present.
Unsafe to Humans:

There are various methods that may be used to explain how humans and the environment are exposed to nanoparticles.
Workers including engineers, scientists, and technicians are mostly exposed at work while creating goods using nanomaterials on a commercial scale and at research size.
This exposure primarily comes from handling raw materials while performing reactions using the apparatus.
The second stage involves exposing customers to such nanomaterials through usage and application, which may have hazardous and detrimental impacts.


Statement 1 is incorrect: Natural NPs are sourced from forest fires, volcanic eruptions, weathering, dust storms etc. Eg: iron oxides/ sulphides, silver, and gold.
Statement 2 is correct: In order to provide an adequate level of sun protection, titanium dioxide and zinc oxide are frequently added to cosmetics among the metal and metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) that may be present.
Statement 3 is correct: Workers including engineers, scientists, and technicians are mostly exposed at work while creating goods using nanomaterials, while on the other hand customers get exposed to such nanomaterials through usage and application, which may have hazardous and detrimental impacts.**

---

### Question 10

If a major solar storm (solar flare) reaches the Earth, which of the following are the possible effects on the Earth?

GPS and navigation systems could fail.
Tsunamis could occur at equatorial regions.
Power grids could be damaged.
Intense auroras could occur over much of the Earth
Forest fires could take place over much of the planet.
Orbits of the satellites could be disturbed.
Shortwave radio communication of the aircraft flying over polar regions could be interrupted.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

- (a) 1, 2, 4 and 5 only
- (b) 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 only
- (c) 1, 3, 4, 6 and 7 only
- (d) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Space Activity
SOLAR FLARE

NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) studies how the Sun creates solar activity and drives space weather.
Solar flares are a sudden explosion of energy caused by reorganizing of magnetic field lines near sunspots.
Solar magnetic cycle that works in deep interior of Sun creates regions that rise to surface and appear like dark spots, known as sunspots.
They appear dark because they are cooler than other parts of Sun’s surface.
In a solar flare, energy stored in sun’s magnetic structures is converted into light and heat energy.
This causes emission of high energy x-ray radiation and highly accelerated charged particles to leave the sun’s surface.
Sometimes solar flares also cause hot plasma to be ejected from Sun, causing a solar storm, and this is called Coronal Mass Ejection (CME).
Energy, radiation and high energy particles emitted by solar flares can trigger intense lights in the sky, called Auroras.
These solar explosions propel bursts of particles and electromagnetic fluctuations into Earth’s atmosphere that could destroy transformers in power systems. Particles from a CME can potentially collide with a satellite’s critical electronics, causing the satellite’s systems to malfunction.

Expected high-frequency communication blackouts, satellite  anomalies,  GPS scintillations, airline communication impacts.

Statements 1 and 7 are correct: These solar explosions propel bursts of particles and electromagnetic fluctuations into Earth’s atmosphere that could lead to the malfunction of satellites, which might impact high-frequency communication blackouts, satellite anomalies, GPS scintillations, airline communication.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Tsunamis occur due to seismic activity.
Statement 3 is correct: The solar explosions propel bursts of particles and electromagnetic fluctuations into Earth’s atmosphere that could destroy transformers in power systems Statement 4 is correct: Energy, radiation and high energy particles emitted by solar flares can trigger intense lights in the sky, called Auroras. Statement 5 is incorrect: Flares are electromagnetic radiation bursts rather than actual fires. They won’t start forest fires as a result.
Statement 6 is correct: Particles from a CME can potentially collide with a satellite’s critical electronics, causing the satellite’s systems to malfunction.**

---

### Question 11

Which one of the following statements best reflects the idea behind the “Fractional Orbital Bombardment System” often talked about in the media?

- (a) A hypersonic missile is launched into space to counter the asteroid approaching the Earth and explode it in space.
- (b) A spacecraft lands on another planet after making several orbital motions.
- (c) A missile is put into a stable orbit around the Earth and deorbits over a target on the Earth.
- (d) A spacecraft moves along a comet with the same speed and places a probe on its surface
Explanation


**Ans: c
Sub-Theme: Defence Infrastructure
The Correct answer is Option (c): Fractional Orbital Bombardment System


A Fractional  Orbital  Bombardment
System (FOBS) is a warhead delivery system that uses a low earth orbit towards its target destination. Just before reaching the target, it de-orbits through a retrograde engine burn.
The Soviet Union first developed FOBS as a nuclear-weapons delivery system in the
In August 2021, the People’s Republic of China tested a weapon that combined a FOBS with a hypersonic glide vehicle.
It had no range limit, its flight path would not reveal the target location, and warheads could be directed to North America over the South Pole, evading detection by NORAD’s north-facing early warning systems.
The maximum altitude would be around 150 km.
Energetically, this would require a launch vehicle powerful enough to be capable of putting the weapon ‘into orbit’.
However the orbit is only a fraction of a full orbit, not sustained, and so there would be much less need to control a precise orbit, or to maintain it long term.**

---

### Question 12

Consider the following statements:

Biofilms can form on medical implants within human tissues.
Biofilms can form on food and food processing surfaces.
Biofilms can exhibit antibiotic resistance.

Which of the statements given above are correct?

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
Explanation


**Ans: d
Sub-Theme: Microorganisms

Statement 1 and 2 are correct: Biofilms may form on a wide variety of surfaces, including living tissues, food and food processing surfaces, indwelling medical devices (devices in the body like catheters, heart valves), human and animal tissue, industrial or potable water system piping, or natural aquatic systems.
Statement 3 is correct: As Biofilms attach to each other and to the surfaces, they are capable of acting as barriers to antibiotics.

Biofilms

A biofilm is a collection of microbial cells that are encased in a polysaccharide-based matrix and are permanently attached to a surface (i.e., cannot be removed by gentle rinsing).
Van Leeuwenhoek, using his simple microscopes, first observed microorganisms on tooth surfaces and can be credited with the discovery of microbial biofilms.
Microorganisms that form biofilms include bacteria, fungi, and protists.
Noncellular materials such as mineral crystals, corrosion particles, clay or silt particles, or blood components, depending on the environment in which the biofilm has developed, may also be found in the biofilm**

---

---

